---
title: "Growing Strong"
subtitle: "The Institutional Expansion of Knowledge in the Early
Republic"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.31835/crdh.2018.13"
category: "2018"
volume-number: 1
year: 2018
authors:
- last: Oberle III
  first: George D.
  email: goberle@gmu.edu
  affiliation: "University Libraries and Department of History and Art History, George Mason University"
  orcid: 0000-0003-3810-3681
  url: "https://historyarthistory.gmu.edu/people/goberle"
abstract: |
  This essay explores how social network graphs can be utilized to explore the relationships between people in civil societies. This study focuses on the membership data from a sample of learned societies as well as federal employees and U.S. Army officers during the early republic. Using software constructs a visualization which indicates the shared connections between groups. This offers opportunities to explore if memberships in civil societies mirrored political relationships or if civil societies offered a space to cross political boundaries. Network graphs can help us visualize many relationships and, if used with traditional sources, can offer a richer understanding of the past. This article provides early insights into an ongoing project which seeks to test Alexander de Tocqueville famous observation on the importance of civil societies to the expansion of democracy. 
appendix:
- name: Data archive
  file: oberle-v01/oberle-data.csv
- name: Code archive
  file: oberle-v01/oberle-code.Rmd
preview: "/assets/img/v01/oberle/preview.png"
---

It is often enticing to see the proliferation of knowledge and knowledge
creating institutions, such as professional societies, as evidence of an
expansion and democratization of information in the early republic.
However, as specialized interests flourished, and the membership in
specialist organizations increased, it is reasonable to ask did the
opportunity for collaborative interactions between different groups of
people decrease instead of increase? In other words, did the increase in
the number and variety of societies promote expansion of heterogeneous
interests rather than binding groups together through singular designs
that promoted national interests? Typically, scholars examine one group,
or set of groups at a time. As such, historians of science frame their
understanding within the context of scientific discourse while
historians of agricultural institutions, or religion, or politics each
focus on their own niche. Therefore, examining the makeup of multiple
institutions across disciplinary barriers offers an opportunity to
explore a larger proportion of the community in the early American
republic.[^1]

Examining multiple institutions is difficult due to the breadth of the
scope of material that historians need to engage to glean insights into
those institutions. Visualization strategies are useful for providing
refined questions for further research and may be illustrative of
patterns which would otherwise be undetected due to scattered archival
materials in different institutions. Further, they offer significant
opportunities for scholars to find new uses for old sources. These
sources have been sitting on shelves, in boxes, or sometimes are
available online, however they have been unusable due to the limited
ability of people to draw the thousands of connections between the
hundreds of organizations. Using computational methods helps scholars
provide more nuance to their questions and answer questions that could
not be addressed earlier, thereby enhancing our understanding of the
past. A careful examination of a corpus can offer a "medium reading" of
sources which consist of a "large but narrowly constrained corpus
centered on solving a well-defined research question."[^2] Through the
exploration of social networks of the members of learned societies
between 1790--1860 using their membership lists, and those of
other learned groups in civil society, we can explore the nature of the
creation and dissemination of information in the first half of the
nineteenth century.

The social network graph included herein is a part of an ongoing project
to compare shared memberships between the different groups during the
first half century of the early republic. The list currently consists of
7,745 names and 17 organizations. Selection of these groups started by
identifying the oldest learned societies in the republic and then adding
many of the specialized institutions such as the East India Marine
Society and the Academy of Natural Sciences. These were typically
selected due to their early establishment and due to the complete nature
of their membership lists. Many records of these organizations survived
probably due to the advantage of having a large number of leading
citizens of the republic on their rolls. The records of other important
groups are inconsistent and limited numbers have survived, as is the
case with the Medical Society of the District of Columbia, yet their
inclusion was important due to their specialized purpose and their
location in the federal city. Occasionally organizations such as the
Columbian Agricultural Society published the names of their membership
in their journals or other proceedings. Finally, adding in federal
employees and Army officers during strategic dates offered opportunities
to explore if there was a change from a homogenous information
environment to a more diverse and specialized republic of letters.[^3]

{% figure caption: "Figure 1. Network graph of selected early American societies and
groups, 1811--1850. The size of the circles corresponds to the number of
members and the thickness of lines indicate the number of shared
members." %}
![Network graph showing connections between early American societies and groups in nine different catagories](/assets/img/v01/oberle/network.png)
{% endfigure %}

Using software constructs a visualization where the thickness of the
edges indicates more connections between different institutions. This
network graph also provides a visualization of the size of each
organization represented in the list based on the total number of
members.[^4] For example, the American Association for the Advancement
of Science (AmAssocAdvSci) is obviously the largest single group in the
graph, while the Medical Society of the District of Columbia is the
smallest based upon the relative sizes of the circles. This helps
distinguish the relative size of the groups. Coloring the nodes of
organizations by type of group also offers an opportunity to show the
diversity and expansive nature and variation of interests in civil
society. The thickness of the adjoining lines indicates more shared
memberships between groups. Clearly, figure 1 shows a significant
level of connections between individuals across different groups and
suggests that a complex web of relationships existed between these
diverse set of elites across the republic.

Despite the fact that the learned citizens of the republic seem
connected through shared memberships across time, even between small
organizations, this data offers interesting observations which suggest
that very few people actually shared large numbers of connections. For
example, there were only thirty-six occurrences of shared memberships
which consisted of five shared organizations or more. James Bowdoin and
John Pickering made-up twenty-two of the thirty-six. They also shared
the most shared memberships with ten. What stands out from this smaller
list of links is that there are fewer shared memberships between people
who lived in the antebellum period. Those belonging to five or more
groups who lived into the antebellum period were John Quincy Adams, John
P. Jones, and Benjamin Silliman. This may indicate that as specialized
groups emerged many of the white learned men, represented in this graph,
were unable or unwilling to belong to multiple groups.

The diversity of groups in the graph can be observed in the
assignment of type indicated by different colors in the graph. The
primary purpose of organizations offers a useful way to visualize the
diversity of types of organizations in this period. Using the federal
government as a category offers an opportunity to explore connections
between societies across the republic. In the case of the U.S. Army
officers we can see beyond the regional bias which many exist from the
organizations, which are mostly based in New England and the
Mid-Atlantic region. These officers were scattered throughout the
country. Additionally, using the federal employees that worked in the
District of Columbia can offer insights into the impact of the federal
city as a metropole for the nation.[^5] Additionally, this visualization
can help demonstrate the diversity in the exploration of knowledge away
from learned societies which focused on universal aspects of knowledge,
such as the American Philosophical Society and the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, to more specialized groups. The diversity of this
environment became crystalized in the proliferation of civil societies
in the early republic and also in the expansion of democracy in the
Jacksonian period. The proliferation of civil societies in the United
States during the first half of the nineteenth century converged with
the expansion of publishing, which provided opportunities for many of
these organizations to widely disseminate their message to a diverse
public. The common belief among many Americans was that a vibrant civil
society offered the best means to diffuse knowledge to the populace.
This is a significant change from the early republic which greatly
feared factions. This freedom within the public sphere offered
opportunities for many citizens to expand their knowledge beyond the
education acquired in their formative years. Members viewed these groups
as an important defense against tyrannical government and as a way to
defend liberty. Establishing and joining groups formed a crucial part of
the democratic experience. Alexander de Tocqueville famously observed,
"Americans of all ages, of all conditions, of all minds, constantly
unite."[^6] They did this on a scale and scope that was surprising to
Tocqueville, yet he found these societies necessary to a democratic
society. People joined all kinds of societies including scientific
societies and proto-professional societies. These were a crucial part of
the development of the expanding capacity for commercial growth in the
United States. Members joined because they imagined they were
participating in a project which was advancing American civilization
through moral improvement and by learning. The craving for new
scientific wonders and knowledge gripped the populace as more people
participated in manufacturing, engineering, mining, and an ever more
rationalized agricultural system.[^7]

Some of the most interesting relationships in this graph are the federal
employees who lived in the Washington D.C. Figure 2 breaks
out the network relationships into numerical values. Despite the span of
twenty-five years between 1816--1841 and the drastic political changeover
in the cabinet and elected government there were fifty-three people that
remained employed by the government in the national capital. This
constitutes the most shared relationships in the chart with only the
D.C. based National Institute for the Promotion of Science (National
Institute) coming close with thirty shared memberships. In 1816 there
were only two hundred sixty-four federal employees in Washington and
this increased approximately forty-two percent in those twenty-five
years so that by 1841 there were six hundred twenty-nine. The
fifty-three people that remained represent eight percent of the total
number of employees in 1841. Additionally, the graph shows us an
interesting challenge with examining these types of groups. Groups start
and end. When examining figure 2 we can see that the National Institute
has no shared members in 1816 because it was not formed at this point in
time. The Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences was
its predecessor, yet it had only sixteen shared memberships with the 1816
Federal government and was technically still in existence in 1841,
despite the move of most of the members to the new National Institute.
The proliferation of shared memberships in learned societies does not
seem to be associated with employment in the federal government at this
point in time. This may suggest that the traditional notion that the
expansion of the federal government led to an expansion in scientific
learning may not be as interconnected in the early nineteenth century as
it is in the twentieth.[^8]

{% figure caption: "Figure 2. Shared Group Memberships Between Washington D.C. based Federal
Employees and Learned Societies." %}
![A bar graph showing the number of federal employees based in Washington D.C. that were members of certian learned societies.](/assets/img/v01/oberle/federal-employees.png)
{% endfigure %}

So, although more people were joining societies it remains unclear if
there were significant numbers of connections between groups. The
democratic impulse which is evident from the expansion of white male
voting rights and expansion of the marketplace between 1820--1850 also
offered an expansion of the chaotic knowledge production
environment.[^9] Ironically the expanding democratic view of knowledge,
which offered opportunities for non-elite citizen scientists to collect,
codify, and even explain objects within the world in which they lived,
added to the sense of disarray amongst the populace due to the multitude
of conflicting messages from an overwhelming number of sources.
Localized learned societies offered individuals the opportunity to
practice their work with like-minded colleagues and neighbors. As the
opportunities to participate in scientific activities by average
citizens expanded many scientists longed for greater disciplinary
specialization and scholarly rigor. Some called for a nation-wide
organization, such as the American Association for the Advancement of
Science and the National Institute as well as other specialized national
associations, such as the United States Agricultural Society. Each group
focused on their own disciplinary interests which they believed would
promote and expand knowledge for the good of all. These new national
institutions, mostly specialized, also offered a mechanism to assure
credibility to scientific discourse in the United States.

The establishment of groups such as the American Academy for
the Advancement of Science led to, what one scholar called, a "level of
maturity" for American society to develop an important combined voice to
enhance scientific progress. These groups also marked a change from the
older organizations which emphasized the universal nature of knowledge
to a more specialized version. This led the new professional type of
scientist with a key goal: the separation of political interests from science.
The universal organizations of knowledge represented in pink in figure 1
were starting to become less important. The National Institute, the last
of these major universal organizations, was successful in building
political relationships with federal employees yet they were not able to
connect with the increasingly specialized scientific societies. For
example, the National Institute and the AAAS only shared nine members
while the National Institute and the American Philosophical Society, the
oldest learned society in the US, shared thirteen connections. What
makes this more interesting is that the AAAS and the National Institute
were both nationally focused organizations which were based in
Washington D.C. It seems as if many from the AAAS believed that only a
clear focus on science scholarship would allow these organizations to
shed partisanship in order to guide scientific policy for the
nation.[^10] In their view there were too many unqualified participants
in scientific endeavors. One example includes Joseph Henry, professor of
Natural Science at the College of New Jersey (and future Smithsonian
Secretary), who complained that journal editors across the country were
providing a platform for scholars to share their dubious claims when
exposing the false claim that electrification could be utilized to
fertilize insect eggs which were in water drops. Henry confided in a
letter written on August 9, 1838 to his friend and fellow scientist
Alexander Dallas Bache his disappointment with the nation's premier
scientist, Benjamin Silliman, the founder of the *American Journal of
Science* for not having enough
reviewers of the content published in his journal. Henry reminded Bache
of their goal: "we must put down quackery or quackery will put down
science."[^11] Since scientific learning needed to become apolitical,
and thus not subject to the egalitarian inclination in society, those
that saw themselves as serious scholars longed for the establishment of
systematic processes for analysis to thwart the proliferation of
charlatans and the misinformation they propagated among the uneducated.
The assumption is that the new group offered a separation from the chaos of
the political realm. Like in an earlier period the world of scientific
truth had no place for controversy. The politics of citizens and the
state became a new expression of the distrust caused by discord between
different groups.

The proliferation of science and scientific organizations did not always
promote national progress. Scholars have detected ideological distinctions that
fundamentally differentiated the scientific pursuits of scholars who
were Federalists from those who were Jeffersonian-Republicans. These
ideological divisions led to a deep and intense level of skepticism by
Federalists of the validity of what they called disparagingly
"Jeffersonian Science." Federalists resented many of these questionable
areas of study and viewed the practitioners as pretenders who claimed a
scientific authority that the Federalists deemed undeserved. The tension
between groups such as this might offer an opportunity for a competition
of advancement in which a marketplace of ideas can develop new types of
knowledge and advancements. This could also could create a desire for
authority and a desire for homogeneity. This fear continued into the
antebellum period and by 1826 Benjamin Silliman, was eager to
differentiate between those that he viewed as savants and those that
were true scientists. He counted at least 28 societies in the country
spread across ten states and the District of Columbia. Of the
twenty-eight reported, two-thirds were located in the three states of
New York (11), Pennsylvania (4), and Massachusetts (4).[^12] Also,
twenty-four of them were specialized scientific societies, or lyceums,
promoting scientific topics and only four were universal institutions
that resembled the American Philosophical Society. This move toward
professionalization and popular infatuation with science became a
national trend until the Civil War.[^13]

Even though these numbers are impressive they pale when compared to
other proto-professional societies and fraternal societies which
Silliman filtered out from his census of scientific societies. For
example, among the most expansive were the estimated more than nine
hundred agricultural societies founded across the United States before
the Civil War. Many states had even established state boards of
agriculture and, like with many organizations, there were some that
called for a national institution to join together the disparate groups.
Since many of these states did not adequately fund their state boards
and institutions they called for the establishment of the United States
Agricultural Society (USAS).[^14] The USAS, established in 1852, both
attempted to unite the estimated over nine hundred agricultural society
groups across the republic under a single umbrella and sought for
federal funding of the work to promote agriculture. The society,
headquartered in Washington D.C., included "a Free Agricultural Library
at the National Metropolis" in which publications and specimens of
seeds, engravings of animals, as well as models of agricultural
implements from various societies across the country, were collected.
Here they also held meetings in the newly established Smithsonian
Institute, published a quarterly journal, and organized annual national
agricultural exhibition fairs at cities across the country such as
Springfield Massachusetts, Springfield Ohio, Boston, Philadelphia,
Louisville, Richmond, and Chicago. The group promoted the display of a
host of the finest agricultural specimens, mechanical implements,
domestic productions, and even artistic and scientific productions by
offering twenty thousand dollars in premiums to participants.[^15] From
the inception of the USAS their members called for a federal department
of agriculture, which infuriated many southern agricultural advocates
who saw this move as both inappropriate and unnecessary. Edmund Ruffin,
a leader in agricultural knowledge, promoter of southern agricultural
societies, and ultimately a fire-eating secessionist had, at best, mixed
feelings about the society in 1858. He refused to join the society
because he opposed the attempts to draw support from the federal
government while still supporting their objective to promote
agricultural knowledge and because he saw the organization as a political
arm of antislavery interests. At times he even felt "conscious-struck
for my general dislike to all Yankees" yet this did not change his
distrust of them.[^16] Ruffin was a member of the American Association
for the Advancement of Society which was a national institution that
many judged at the time to be an apolitical organization.

In the end, network graphs can help us visualize many relationships and,
if used alongside traditional sources, they can offer a richer understanding
of the past. Figure 1 shows that very diverse groups often have
shared memberships that one would not necessarily expect. Still, there
are many limitations to the graph. Although this graph shows that many
people were connected in many diverse groups in many cases only a few
people had multiple memberships. Using the names of these key
individuals we can explore their roles in the organizations and see if
they had a significant impact in sharing knowledge to a diverse
community. These key individuals may have been corresponding
secretaries. These positions were the main way that the organization
communicated with members and other organizations. Identifying these few
names we can delve into their papers in a more rigorous fashion.
Additionally, there are many more groups which would be useful to add;
activist groups such as abolition societies, the American Colonization
Society and the American Temperance Society come to mind. Also, there
are many silences due to the fact that the source pool remains vast.
These relationships are easy to overlook when examining isolated moments
of political turmoil or social disruptions, and we may overlook
interdependence and attachments between groups that seem to be
distinctive or at odds with each other. The emergence of civil society
within the United States remains a vibrant and crucial issue to explore
in order to better understand the ties that bind people together as well
as those that may tear them apart.

---

### Bibliography

Baatz, Simon. "Philadelphia Patronage: The Institutional Structure of
Natural History in the New Republic, 1800--1833." *Journal of the Early
Republic* 8, no. 2 (July 1, 1988): 111--138. <https://doi.org/10.2307/3123808>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2307/3123808)

Baatz, Simon. "'Squinting at Silliman': Scientific Periodicals in the Early
American Republic, 1810--1833." *Isis* 82, no. 2 (June 1, 1991): 223--244. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/355726 )

Carrier, Lyman. "The United States Agricultural Society, 1852--1860: Its
Relation to the Origin of the United States Department of Agriculture
and the Land Grant Colleges." *Agricultural History* 11, no. 4 (1937):
278--288.

Danhof, Clarence H. *Change in Agriculture: The Northern United States,
1820--1870*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969.

Dupree, A. Hunter. "The National Pattern of American Learned Societies,
1769--1863." In *The Pursuit of Knowledge in the Early American Republic:
American Scientific and Learned Societies from Colonial Times to the
Civil War*, edited by Alexandra Oleson and Sanborn C. Brown, 21--32.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976.

Dupree, A. Hunter. *Science in the Federal Government, a History of Policies and
Activities to 1940*. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 1957.

Ellsworth, Lucius F. "The Philadelphia Society for the Promotion of
Agriculture and Agricultural Reform, 1785--1793." *Agricultural History*
42, no. 3 (Summer 1968): 189--199.

Funk, Kellen, and Lincoln A. Mullen. "The Spine of American Law: Digital
Text Analysis and U.S. Legal Practice." *The American Historical Review*
123, no. 1 (February 1, 2018): 132--164. <https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/123.1.132>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/123.1.132)

Grasso, Christopher. *A Speaking Aristocracy: Transforming Public
Discourse in Eighteenth-Century Connecticut*. Chapel Hill: Published for
the Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture,
Williamsburg, Virginia, by the University of North Carolina Press, 1999.

Gross, Robert A, and Mary Kelley, eds. *An Extensive Republic: Print,
Culture, and Society in the New Nation, 1790--1840*. A History of the
Book in America, v. 2. Chapel Hill: Published in association with the
American Antiquarian Society by the University of North Carolina Press,
2010.

Greene, John C. *American Science in the Age of Jefferson*. 1st ed.
Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1984.

Henry, Joseph. *The Papers of Joseph Henry: January 1838-December 1840,
The Princeton Years*. Edited by Nathan Reingold and Marc Rothenberg.
Vol. 4. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, New York, 1981.

Howe, Daniel Walker. *The Political Culture of the American Whigs*.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979.

Howe, Daniel Walker. *What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America,
1815--1848*. Oxford History of the United States. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.

Kerber, Linda K. *Federalists in Dissent; Imagery and Ideology in
Jeffersonian America*. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1970.

Kohlstedt, Sally. "A Step Toward Scientific Self-Identity in the United
States: The Failure of the National Institute, 1844." *ISIS: Journal of
the History of Science in Society* 62, no. 3 (1971): 339--362.

Kohlstedt, Sally. *The Formation of the American Scientific Community: The
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1848--60*. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1976.

Mathew, W. M. *Edmund Ruffin and the Crisis of Slavery in the Old South:
The Failure of Agricultural Reform*. Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1988.

Neem, Johann N. *Creating a Nation of Joiners: Democracy and Civil
Society in Early National Massachusetts*. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press, 2008. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674041370 )

Oberle III, George, D. "Institutionalizing Knowledge in Washington's
Early Republic." Panel: Constructing New Lives and Institutions in
Antebellum Washington. Washington, D. C. Accessed June 30, 2018. <http://mars.gmu.edu/handle/1920/10044>.

Oberle, George D. "Institutionalizing the Information Revolution:
Debates over Knowledge Institutions in the Early American Republic."
PhD diss., George Mason University, 2016.
<http://search.proquest.com/docview/1801956690/abstract/FEF47B13049F443DPQ/1>.

Oleson, Alexandra, and Sanborn Conner Brown, eds. *The Pursuit of
Knowledge in the Early American Republic: American Scientific and
Learned Societies from Colonial Times to the Civil War*. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976.

Rossiter, Margaret W. *The Emergence of Agricultural Science: Justus
Liebig and the Americans, 1840--1880*. Yale Studies in the History of
Science and Medicine 9. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975.

Ruffin, Edmund. *The Diary of Edmund Ruffin*. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press, 1972. 

Tocqueville, Alexis de. *Democracy in America / Translated, Edited, and
with an Introduction by Harvey C. Mansfield and Delba Winthrop*. Edited
by Harvey Claflin Mansfield and Delba Winthrop. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2000.

United States Agricultural Society. *Seventh National Exhibition by the
United States Agricultural Society, to Be Held in the City of Chicago,
September 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, and 17th, 1859.* Chicago: Press & Tribune Job Printing Office, 1859. <http://hdl.handle.net/2027/uiuo.ark:/13960/t6542mx0p>.

Walther, Eric H. *The Fire-Eaters*. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1992.

Wilentz, Sean. *Chants Democratic: New York City and the Rise of the
American Working Class, 1788--1850*. 20th anniversary ed. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2004.

Wilentz, Sean. *The Rise of American Democracy: Jefferson to Lincoln*. New
York: Norton, 2005.

---

### Notes
This work originated with a seminar class taught by Lincoln Mullen
    at George Mason University in the Fall semester 2014 called
    Programming in Digital History/New Media (see
    <http://lincolnmullen.com/courses/clio3.2014>)
    and then was continued in a paper delivered at the 2015 Annual
    Meeting of the District of Columbia Historical Society deposited in
    the Mason Archival Repository System, <http://hdl.handle.net/1920/10044>.
    I am greatly indebted to Professor Mullen and Jordan Bratt as well
    as the students in the 2014 class. Dr. Zachary Schrag and Dr.
    Rosemarie Zagarri both gave me helpful feedback. My friends in
    George Mason's Early American Workshop including Jeri Wieringa who
    provided helpful encouragement and feedback. Finally, I am grateful
    for the anonymous reviewers and Dr. Stephen Robertson who all
    graciously provided very helpful insights and suggestions.

[^1]: Oleson and Brown, *The Pursuit of
    Knowledge in the Early American Republic*; Dupree,
    *Science in the Federal Government*; Oberle III,
    "Institutionalizing the Information Revolution."

[^2]: Funk and Mullen, "The Spine of American Law," 132--164.

[^3]: This began by using the Scholarly Societies project formally
    hosted at University of Waterloo Library which can now be found at <http://www.references.net/societies/>.
    I was very strict at first to only use "learned societies" however
    it became clear the project could benefit by using other membership
    lists including members of government employees that worked in the
    Federal city at different times. Additionally, using Army officers
    could help explore the idea offered in many works which claim that
    the Army helped expand scientific knowledge and bind the disparate
    nation together.

[^4]: The software used was RStudio and the network graph constructed
    with the package called igraph.

[^5]: Which an earlier study suggests that the organizations in
    Washington D.C. were relatively isolated from the rest of the
    republic. See Oberle III., "Institutionalizing Knowledge in
    Washington's Early Republic."

[^6]: Tocqueville, *Democracy in America*, 489.

[^7]: Wilentz, *The Rise of American Democracy*; Wilentz,
    *Chants Democratic*; Howe, *The Political Culture of
    the American Whigs*; Howe, *What Hath God Wrought*;
    Gross and Kelly, *An Extensive Republic*; Neem, *Creating a Nation of Joiners*.

[^8]: Dupree, *Science in the Federal Government*.

[^9]: Oleson and Brown, *The Pursuit of Knowledge in the Early American
    Republic*; Baatz, "Philadelphia Patronage," 111--138; Kohlstedt, *The Formation of the American Scientific Community*; These ideas are being developed for a book which is a
    revision of my dissertation titled "The Institutionalization of
    Knowledge."

[^10]: Dupree, *Science in the Federal Government*, 115--119.

[^11]: Henry, *Papers*; Oberle, "Institutionalizing the Information Revolution," 228--231.

[^12]: Oberle, "Institutionalizing the Information Revolution."

[^13]: Kerber, *Federalists in Dissent*; Greene, *American Science in the Age of Jefferson*; here I also rely on the an understanding of the conflict over access to the public sphere by scholars such as Grasso, *A Speaking Aristocracy*; Dupree, "The
    National Pattern of American Learned Societies" 21--32.

[^14]: Unfortunately, I have not found a good source for the membership
    list for the USAS at this time.

[^15]: Carrier, "The United States Agricultural Society,
    1852--1860"; Rossiter, *The Emergence of Agricultural
    Science*; Danhof, *Change in Agriculture*; Mathew,
    *Edmund Ruffin and the Crisis of Slavery*; Ellsworth, "The Philadelphia Society," 189--99; United States Agricultural Society, *Seventh National Exhibition*.

[^16]: Ruffin, *The Diary of Edmund Ruffin*, 145--146; Walther, *The Fire Eaters,* 228.
