---
title: "Mapping the Media Landscape in Old Regime France"
subtitle: "Citation Practices and Social Reading in the Affiches, 1770–1788"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.31835/crdh.2018.11"
category: "2018"
volume-number: 1
year: 2018
authors:
- last: Bond
  first: Elizabeth Andrews 
  email: bond.282@osu.edu
  affiliation: "Department of History, Ohio State University"
  orcid: 0000-0003-1473-1210
  url: "http://u.osu.edu/bond.282"
abstract: |
  In the decades preceding the French Revolution, newspapers in France published thousands of letters from their readers. Such letters are a rich source for studying the ways in which readers responded to print. This article explores how the practices that readers and publishers employed to reference print matter helped the reading public conceptualize connections between the text they were reading and the larger media landscape. Editors invited their readers to contribute their opinions, and readers responded to the editors and to one another. They referenced articles in the paper, books, or other publications that had inspired their response. Readers also reacted to a periodical other than the one to which they addressed their letter. Using network analysis, the publications that letter writers responded to were tracked across newspapers. Visualizing citations as a network reveals the relationship between literary or political publications and the provincial general information newspapers known as <em>affiches</em>. Readers consumed such disparate publications together. In fact, readers placed the periodicals in direct dialogue by responding to uncensored and international publications in their letters to the censored affiches. Parisian and international publications were read and discussed in provincial centers, even in the censored Old Regime press.
preview: "/assets/img/v01/bond/preview.png"
---

Readers in eighteenth-century France witnessed both the slow rise of
literacy and the rapid growth in both the quantity and variety of print.
Historians of Early Modern Europe have investigated existing diaries and
private correspondence in order to understand the ways a particular
individual responded to this age of expanding print culture. Yet, for
studying the responses of the general reading public, historians have
relatively less sources to work with. It remains rather difficult to
study what people living in the eighteenth century thought about what
they read, especially at any kind of large scale. My research presents a
new approach: the study of readers' letters in newspapers published
throughout France between 1770--1791. This article explores how the
practices that readers and publishers employed to reference print matter
helped the reading public conceptualize connections between the text
they were reading and the larger media landscape.

Historians of the book have investigated extensively what publications
were accessible to eighteenth-century readers. They have also traced the
circulation of publications, and that work has shed light on who owned
books, and in many cases, the exact titles that people purchased.
Drawing upon wills, bankruptcy records, auction catalogs, and publishing
house records, historians have reconstructed the shifts in print
consumption patterns over the course of the century. The work on the
clandestine book trade in France is particularly extensive; such books
were published outside of France to avoid censorship, although they were
sold widely in France.[^1] In short, historians know a great deal about
this era of print saturation, and in particular, what books people
purchased, sold, and passed down. But then as now, owning a book did not
necessarily mean one had read it. Even if one did read a particular
book, what each reader made of the text varied considerably.[^2]

The sources under study have received little scholarly attention, but
they are nevertheless particularly well suited to the study of reception
in the eighteenth century: the thousands of letters to the editor
published in French newspapers in the last decades of the Old Regime.
The first French daily newspaper, the *Journal de Paris,* began
publication in 1777. It followed the format of the short newspapers
titled *affiches*, *annonces*, *et avis divers*, generally known as
*affiches*, that were published throughout the kingdom from the 1770s
and into the first years of the French Revolution. This paper builds
upon my book manuscript, which is a study of the *affiches* and the
engagement of their readers, and which traces the themes and questions
that readers brought to the paper as they puzzled through what it meant
to live in an age of enlightenment. Within the approximately 7,000
letters under study, writers discussed what they had read, and they
reacted to texts. They cited books and other newspapers, and they cited
one another. What is more, the editors re-published letters that had
appeared in other newspapers, which they indicated in an editorial note
that cited the publication.[^3] But they also cut and pasted sentences,
paragraphs, or entire articles without attributing the content.

The newspapers also hold promise for further digital history research. First, with a team of undergraduate students, we are converting the images of the letters to the editor into text files
suitable for text analysis. This effort is ongoing.[^4] Second, I am
building a database of the approximately 7,000 letters. The sources are
rich in metadata, which include location data (where it was written,
published, republished), prosopographical data (the author's name, pen
name, social position, profession, and linked data like VIAF numbers of
known authors[^5]), and the relationships to books and ideas (books
cited, newspapers cited, and the other newspapers that printed the same
letter).

This research engages with one of the cardinal topics in the field: the
reception of Enlightenment ideas and the nature of their link to the
Revolution that followed. Digital history and computational tools like
text analysis and network analysis are well-suited to this
historiographic debate, because they allow the historian to consider the
connections between writers and readers, and between print ephemera and
books, in new ways.

The readers and the editors of the *affiches* described the periodicals
as an ongoing dialogue. Editors asked their readers to contribute their
opinions on certain topics, and readers responded to the editors and to
one another. Indeed, editors would print serialized debates between
readers on a range of subject manner, such as the merits of inoculation,
the safety of bathing an infant in cold water, or whether women should
be so vocal in the paper. In their responses, they referenced articles
in the paper, books, or other publications that had inspired their
response. The citation practices between newspapers, where readers
reacted to content they had read in a periodical, show that rather than writing to that particular periodical for their response, readers wrote instead to their local  *affiches*. The practice was employed by a subset of the *affiches* in the dataset, which included the
newspapers published in Paris, Toulouse, Troyes, Grenoble, Marseille,
Amiens, Angers, Rouen, and Dijon, and only by a small proportion of
writers. In fact, about one percent of the letters in the corpus of
7,000 reacted to a periodical other than the one to which they addressed
their letter.

While the present paper concerns 1% of the larger corpus of letters,
this citation practice nevertheless merits study. First, citing other
newspapers was an important counterbalance to the other citation
approaches that editors and writers used, such as referencing books,
referring to previous articles in the same *affiches*, or recommending
other print matter available in the shop of the editor (who was often
also a printer-bookseller).

Moreover, this investigation lends further insight into the reading
practices of the day. While many men and women read the local *affiches*
in isolation, the signaling by editors and readers through
republication, book references, and citations of articles are
nevertheless important, because they pointed the readers\' attention
toward a wider world of print---a world that was shaped by the social
nature of reading in the eighteenth century, when many accessed
periodicals in shared spaces like reading rooms and cafés.[^6]

To track the publications that letter writers responded to, I have
visualized them in figure 1 as a network. A network plot is an apt
visualization tool in this case, because it allows the historian to map
relationships---in this case, information sharing---in ways that are not
tied to space. The media landscape mapped here is a conceptual one that
traces the publications French readers consumed alongside the
*affiches*. Figure 1 illustrates the links between local, national,
international, and more specialized information. The nodes at the center
of figure 1 show a cluster of literary periodicals that included two
literary journals published in France: the *Mercure de France*, run by
the prominent publisher, Charles-Joseph Panckoucke, and *L'Année
Littéraire*, a more conservative publication by Élie Fréron, who often
debated Voltaire and other philosophes. The *Gazette de
France*, which published short, censored news reports on geopolitical
matters, was referenced by Parisian and provincial *affiches*. Readers
responded to specialized periodicals on jurisprudence (*Gazette des
Tribunaux*), military news and tactical history (*Journal Militaire*),
and medicine and the sciences (*Journal de Physique*). The readers of
the *affiches* also reacted to uncensored papers published abroad in
Brussels, Liège, and London that commented on politics in France,
including the *Journal de Politique et Littéraire*, the *Annales
politiques, civiles et littéraire*, and the *Esprit des Journaux*.[^7]

{% figure caption: "Figure 1. In this network visualization, each node is a periodical, and each edge
is a reference in one of the *affiches* to another periodical. The arrow
points toward the periodical cited in the letter, and away from the
newspaper where it was published. All nodes are single degree nodes. The
green nodes represent the *affiches*, commercial newspapers printed
throughout France. The blue nodes indicate periodicals published abroad
for a French audience. The orange nodes represent French periodicals
with more specialized content, such as agriculture, the law, or
medicine.
The newspapers at the center of the network plot include the Parisian
*affiches*, the *Journal général de France* and the first daily, the
*Journal de Paris*. Further from the center lie provincial *affiches*,
especially from northern and northeastern France. For example, the *affiches* published in Amiens cited the *Affiches de
Tours*, but also the *Journal de Physique* and the *Mercure de France*.
The *affiches* from Rouen cited the specialist content of the *Gazette
d'Agriculture* and the *Gazette des Tribunaux*. But newspapers in
cities and large towns much further from Paris also adopted this
citation style. For example, the *Affiches de Toulouse* published
readers' responses to content from the *Mercure de France* and the
*affiches* published in Orléans. The *Affiches du Dauphiné* from
Grenoble cited the *Gazette de France* and the *Gazette des Tribunaux*." %}
![Network graph showing connections between affiches published in France, periodicals published in France, and periodicals published abroad.](/assets/img/v01/bond/network.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

Such literary and political publications were central in readers'
citations, especially among those who wrote to the Parisian newspapers
and to the *Affiches de Troyes*. Moreover, the citation patterns of
readers differed in noteworthy ways from the republication practices of
the *affiches*' editors. Editors were less apt to pick up content from
specialized journals or international newspapers and re-publish it in
their own *affiches* with frequency, even though such periodicals did
publish letters to the editor. Instead, editors drew their republished
content from the surrounding towns and cities, privileging regional
concerns.[^8] By contrast, readers that cited newspapers drew upon
content from further afield, and in particular from newspapers published
outside of France. Under the Old Regime, several newspapers were
published "abroad," and listed London, Brussels, or Liège---and on
occasion Paris---as their site of publication.[^9] Historians of the
press have questioned whether all such newspapers made for a French
audience were in fact published abroad, or whether they sometimes
printed in France and simply indicated an international publication site
in order to escape censorship by the French government.

The network plot of reader citations presented here renders a picture of
the French reading public that is much less regional in its orientation.
The centrality of literary and political newspapers underscores that
Parisian and international publications were read and discussed in
provincial centers. But moreover, it reveals integration between
literary and political periodicals that were considered more erudite and
the readership of the more practical, commercially oriented
*affiches*.[^10] While newspaper editors tended to respond to and
reprint content focused on regional concerns by drawing on *affiches*
and specialized publications from the surrounding provinces, this paper
demonstrates that readers adopted a more expansive approach to
information sharing that was less tied to local geographies and
concerns. When readers cited other periodicals in their letters, they
tended to cite national and international literary and political
periodicals. While previous studies of the *affiches* have emphasized
their lack of political content, this paper demonstrates that readers of
the *affiches* did access literary content, specialist knowledge, and
political information that was international in scope.

The network analysis of shared newspaper content sheds new light on the
history of print culture. First, figure 1 shows that readers were not
consuming the *affiches* in isolation. Indeed, the *affiches* were part
of a larger world of print; and readers and editors shaped this vision
of the paper through their citation practices. Second, the practice of
reacting to one paper by writing a public letter to another is a
reflection of the ways people in the eighteenth century read---reading,
after all, was a social, collaborative undertaking. People consumed the
newspapers studied here in homes, reading rooms, cafes, and bookstores
where other periodicals were available, and their references serve as
reminders of this material context. Moreover, readers and editors used
the *affiches* in their town as a way to stimulate local discussion
around a particular topic that had appeared in a more specialized
*journal.* They also cited newspaper content from uncensored
publications. The prevalence of uncensored literary and political
publications cited in the provincial affiches indicates that readers
were aware of more political news than one might anticipate from reading
the censored *affiches* from a particular town alone. More broadly, when
compared to the wide range of books cited, the references to newspapers
converged more around a shared collection of popular periodicals.

Network analysis also offers insight into reading practices in the
eighteenth century. The references that form the ties between
periodicals in the network illustrate how readers established their
authority as writers, tagged the people they were trying to talk to, and
signaled to the reader and the publication how such information was
connected to other works. Men and women living in Paris and in the
provinces alike accessed literary and political criticism. For
historians of the Old Regime and the Revolution that followed, the
*affiches* offer a window into the political education of the French
reading public.

---

### Bibliography

Bond, Elizabeth Andrews. "Circuits of Practical Knowledge: The Network
of Letters to the Editor in the French Provincial Press, 1770--1788."
*French Historical Studies* 39, no. 3 (August 2016): 535--565.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/00161071-3500309>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1215/00161071-3500309)

Burrows, Simon. *Blackmail, Scandal, and Revolution: London's French
libellistes, 1758--1792*. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006.

Causer, Tim and Valerie Wallace. "Building a Volunteer Community:
Results and Findings from Transcribe Bentham." *Digital Humanities
Quarterly* 6, no. 2 (2012). <http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000125/000125.html>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203423387 )

Censer, Jack. *The French Press in the Age of Enlightenment*. New York:
Routledge, 2002.

Cordell, Ryan, and Abby Mullen. "'Fugitive Verses': The Circulation of
Poems in Nineteenth-Century American Newspapers." *American Periodicals:
A Journal of History & Criticism* 27, no. 1 (April 2017): 29--52.

Curran, Mark. "Beyond the Forbidden Best-Sellers of Pre-Revolutionary
France." *The Historical Journal* 56, no. 1 (2013): 89--112.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0018246X12000556>.

Darnton, Robert. *The Literary Underground of the Old Regime*.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982.

Darnton, Robert. "Readers Respond to Rousseau." In *The Great Cat
Massacre and other Episodes in French Cultural History*, 215---256. New
York: Basic Books, 1984.

Furet, François and Jacques Ozouf. *Lire et écrire: l'alphabétisation
des Français de Calvin à Jules Ferry*. 2 vols. Paris: Éditions de
Minuit, 1985.

Gruder, Vivian. *The Notables and the Nation: The Political Schooling of
the French, 1787--1788*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007.

Labrosse, Claude. *Lire au XVIIIe siècle: la Nouvelle Héloïse et ses
lecteurs.* Lyon: Presses universitaires de Lyon, 1985.

The Multigraph Collective. *Interacting with Print: Elements of Reading
in the Era of Print Saturation*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2018.

Popkin, Jeremy D. *News and Politics in the Age of Revolution: Jean
Luzac's Gazette de Leyde*. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7591/9781501701511)

Roche, Daniel. *Le peuple de Paris: essai sur la culture populaire au
XVIIIe siècle*. Paris: Aubier Montaigne, 1981.

Sgard, Jean. "Dictionnaire des Journaux: Édition électronique revue,
corrigée et augmentée du Dictionnaire des Journaux (1600--1789)." Hosted
by the Institut des sciences de l'Homme. Accessed May 1, 2018.
<http://dictionnaire-journaux.gazettes18e.fr/>.

Slauter, Will. "Le paragraphe mobile." *Annales. Histoire, sciences
sociales* 67, no. 2 (2012): 363--389. <https://www.jstor.org/stable/23211634>.

Strange, Carolyn, Daniel McNamara, Josh Wodak, and Ian Wood. "Mining for
the Meanings of a Murder: The Impact of OCR Quality on the Use of
Digitized Historical Newspapers." *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 8, no.
1 (2014). <http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000168/000168.html>.

Williams, Abigail. *The Social Life of Books: Reading Together in the
Eighteenth-Century Home*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2017. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.12987/yale/9780300208290.001.0001)

---

### Notes

[^1]: Among the landmark studies in this field, see, especially Furet et
    al., *Lire et écrire*; Roche, *Le Peuple de Paris*; Darnton, *The Literary Underground*; and more recent reevaluations, Curran, "Beyond the Forbidden Best-Sellers," 89--112; Multigraph Collective, *Interacting with Print*.

[^2]: Research on readers' responses to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's *Julie, ou La Nouvelle Heloïse*, one of the most popular books of the period, is particularly extensive. Darnton, "Readers Respond," 215--256; and Labrosse, *Lire au XVIIIe siècle*.

[^3]: This project is informed by scholarship on editorial citation,
    authorship, and republication practices in the eighteenth-and
    nineteenth-century press, which has demonstrated that reuse of
    newspaper content spanned the Atlantic world through information
    networks between publications. Cordell et al., "Fugitive Verses,"
    29--52; Slauter, "Paragraphe Mobile," 363--389.

[^4]: The digitization of the content of the nearly 7,000 letters now
    underway will make possible a range of further text analysis of the
    source material. Such studies include: tracing what information
    "went viral" and how it spread; topic modeling the content of the
    *affiches*; and investigating shifts in discourse that corresponded
    with key institutional and political changes during the early years
    of the French Revolution.

    Owing to the image quality of the files under study, the most
    appropriate digitization method for the sources is transcription.
    Initial trials using OCR software on a sample of the letters
    introduced too many errors into the text files. Correction of the
    OCR results was more time consuming than manually transcribing the
    content. For a discussion of best practices in crowdsourced
    transcription, see Causer et al., "Building a Volunteer
    Community"; Strange et al., "Mining for Meanings of a Murder."

[^5]: Virtual International Authority File numbers are unique
    identifiers assigned to authors across library databases. For
    further information on VIAF numbers, see <https://viaf.org/>.

[^6]: Reading in the eighteenth century was a social activity. Williams,
    *Social Life*, 110--125. Vivian Gruder has located pamphlets and
    periodicals---including the *affiches*---in French reading rooms and
    cafés, which formed a key locus of political education for the
    French reading public. Gruder, *Notables and Nation*, 196--207.

[^7]: Sgard, *Dictionnaire de la Presse*.

[^8]: Bond, "Circuits of Practical Knowledge," 555--561.

[^9]: Jeremy Popkin and Simon Burrows have written on publications
    produced outside of French borders for a French audience. Popkin,
    *News and Politics in an Age of Revolution*; Burrows, *Blackmail,
    Scandal, and Revolution*.

[^10]: Jack Censer has suggested that the *affiches* were more
    conservative in political orientation, because the censored papers
    supported the powerful institutions of the Church and the Bourbon
    monarchy, and limited the content concerning the working classes.
    Censer, *French Press*, 54--65.
