---
title: "Sites of Sovereignty"
subtitle: "American Indian Earthwork and Burial Site Activism in the Midwest, 1917–1968"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.31835/crdh.2018.03"
category: "2018"
volume-number: 1
year: 2018
authors:
- last: Wise
  first: Mary
  email: mary-wise@uiowa.edu
  affiliation: "History Department, University of Iowa"
  orcid: 0000-0003-1551-1033
  url: "http://thestudio.uiowa.edu/historycorps/exhibits/show/members"
abstract: |
  This article examines earthwork activism in the Midwest at the turn of the twentieth century. The activism of Emma Big Bear Holt (Ho-Chunk) and the Conley sisters (Wyandot) in the early twentieth century are connected by the history of Indian removal. Earthwork and burial site activists used traditional knowledge, alliance building, family kinship networks, and civic activism. The Midwest is a site of Indian removal and earthwork and burial site activism which revises narratives of Indian removal that textually erased the Ho-Chunk, Miami, and Wyandot. Earthwork and burial site activism bear the marks of indigenous self-determinative action in the past and present. The activists’ history resists narratives of American Indian defeat. Rather it supports the idea that American Indian activism can be found even in the most oppressive periods of federal policy. Furthermore, their story demonstrates that “Indian Removal,” best known as the coerced relocation of the southeastern tribes to Indian Territory, affected many tribes, with devastating effect. Earthwork and burial site activism was self-determinative. The story of Indigenous activism at earthworks in the Midwest is not a simple one. Rather, this is a tale of continuous reform and activism that extends well into the twenty-first century.  
appendix:
- name: Data archive
  file: wise-v01/wise-data.zip
preview: "/assets/img/v01/wise/preview.png"
---

In 1917, some McGregor, Iowa residents were surprised when Emma Big
Bear Holt and her husband Henry, a Ho-Chunk family, walked down Main
Street heading north towards the bluffs overlooking the Mississippi.[^1]
The United States government had forcibly removed the Ho-Chunk from
their ancestral homelands in northern Wisconsin from 1830 to 1865.
Treaties with the Ho-Chunk forced them from Wisconsin to Iowa, from Iowa
to Minnesota, from Minnesota to South Dakota, from South Dakota to
Nebraska, and then from Nebraska back to Wisconsin.[^2] By returning
from Nebraska to occupy mound sites, Emma and William Henry Holt
strategically rejected federal policies. When the Big Bear Holt family
returned to northeast Iowa and camped near the earthworks, they began a
five-decade long campaign to increase protections for vulnerable
earthworks.

Seven years before the Big Bear Holt family returned to Iowa, Lyda
Conley (Wyandot) stood before the nine justices of the Supreme Court and
demanded federal protections for a Wyandot burial ground at risk of
being lost to developers.[^3] In her brief, Lyda Conley argued that
Native American graves required federal protection. The Conley sisters
strategically advocated for the Huron Place Cemetery. While Ida
physically occupied the cemetery in a shack she built herself from 1907
on, Lyda studied for and passed the Kansas bar, argued for the
restoration of the Kansas Wyandot sovereignty over the cemetery in
federal district courts, and managed a brilliant public relations
campaign that demonstrated the barbarism of destroying the Huron Place
Cemetery.[^4]

Emma Big Bear Holt and the Conley sisters were earthwork and burial site
activists. Their activism was a part of a complex American Indian
political tradition that preceded, spanned the full breadth of, and
extends past the close of the twentieth century. Earthwork and burial
site activism was self-determinative because it transformed earthworks
and burial sites into sites of sovereignty. Emma Big Bear Holt and the
Conley sisters strategically occupied sites, pursued litigation, and
circulated petitions to reassert Ho-Chunk and Wyandot control over
earthworks and burial sites. The Big Bear Holt family and the Conley
sisters exercised their right to care for their ancestral sites
according to their cultural proscriptions. The proscriptions were
nation-specific. While Emma Big Bear camped near mounds and hosted her
extended family when they visited their ancestor graves annually and
performed ceremonies at them, the Conley sisters wanted to return the
Huron Place cemetery to its original appearance. These activists
exercised their sovereign right to care for earthworks according to
their system of beliefs.

Activist narratives uncovered in disparate archives and evidenced
through visualizations created using mapping and textual analysis fits
well within an increasingly expansive historiography on the Indigenous
Midwest. Scholars of Native North America explain how some Indigenous
families "hid in plain sight" despite federal policies that ordered the
expulsion of American Indian people from their Midwest homelands.
Putting the primary sources that document the activism of Emma Big Bear
Holt and the Conley sisters in conversation with this scholarship
explains how earthwork and burial site activists accomplished part of
their work. Relationship building helped American Indian families remain
in the Midwest but so too did textual histories, celebrations, and
memorials which erased American Indian histories, contemporary
realities, and violent removal.[^5] Scholarship on traditional knowledge
and gender roles in Native North America, too, adds dimensionality to
the function of earthwork and burial site activism. Removal ruptured
Ho-Chunk and Wyandot traditional practices and earthwork and burial site
activism compensated for Removal. For example, Ho-Chunk and Wyandot
women assumed traditional matriarchal roles when they lobbied for
earthworks and burial sites.[^6] While this scholarship helps explains
how Emma Big Bear Holt and the Conley sisters returned to the Midwest,
only digital methods reveal the complexities of their activism.

### Emma Big Bear Holt and Earthworks in Northeastern Iowa, 1917--1968

Emma Big Bear Holt and her family camped near earthworks in northeastern
Iowa and their site occupations changed amateur archaeological practice.
Emma Big Bear Holt moved her campsite to earthworks that amateur
archaeologists targeted frequently (figures 1--2).[^7] When amateur
archaeologists encountered Emma Big Bear Holt at an earthwork site, she,
Henry, and their daughter Emiline might engage them in conversation. For
example, in 1934, Ellison Orr, Iowa's most prominent amateur
archaeologist, encountered the Holts about one half mile north of Waukon
Junction, Iowa. After interviewing Emma through Henry (Emma did not
speak English), Orr elected not to open the earthworks near their
lodge.[^8] Emma was successful at defending earthworks because she built
relationships with amateur archaeologists and because she strategically
represented herself: the Big Bear Holts lived in a ciporoke (traditional
Ho-Chunk housing), Emma spoke Hocak, and she sold traditional handmade
goods (baskets, beadwork, jewelry and more). Because McGregor residents
identified her as a Ho-Chunk person, she was granted limited authority
over earthworks.

Amateur archaeologists in northeastern Iowa respected Emma's authority
in inconsistent ways. Though they identified Emma as the descendant of a
powerful Ho-Chunk family, they would inevitably describe her in
newspaper articles as illiterate and poverty-stricken.[^9] When they
encountered the Big Bear Holts at earthworks, they did not report her to
federal authorities nor did they forcibly remove her from earthworks.
Though amateur archaeologists saw no link between her family and the
builders of the massive effigy mounds in northeastern Iowa, Emma's
distinguished family made it easier for amateurs to accept her authority
over earthworks. Emma was the granddaughter of a nineteenth century
Ho-Chunk leader.

{% figure caption: "Figure 1. Amateur Archaeologists Sites in northeast Iowa, 1909--1916;
size of the points indicates the frequency of the site excavated." %}
![A map showing amateur archaeologists sites in northeast Iowa marked with red dots.](/assets/img/v01/wise/figure1.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

{% figure caption: "Figure 2. Green dots are campsites where Emma camped frequently." %}
![A map showing campsites where Emma camped frequently, indicated by green dots.](/assets/img/v01/wise/figure2.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

While the only scholarship on Emma Big Bear labels her the "last
Winnebago in northeastern Iowa," she was far from the last or even the
only Winnebago in Allamakee County.[^10] Crucial to Emma Big Bear Holt's
activism was her proximity to active indigenous communities. Family
members from Black River Falls certainly helped the Big Bear Holts
accomplish their strategic site occupations but their contributions to the
success of Emma's protests remains unrecognized. For example, Robert
Holt, Emma's nephew, stayed with the Big Bear Holt family in the summer
of 1930.[^11] Beyond her family, Emma and her family relied on their
Ho-Chunk neighbors. The Big Bear Holt family had to accommodate federal
surveillance and this accommodation involved traveling hundreds of miles
to either the federal agent in Wisconsin or Nebraska annually. To mask
her activism, Emma Big Bear Holt reported that she lived with family
members at the Grand Rapids agency rather than report her address in
Allamakee County and her neighbors helped her physically travel to the
agency annually. Even after 1930, when the Bureau of Indian Affairs
mandated that agents create a census of all enrollees whether on the
reservation or elsewhere, Emma continued to report that she lived at the
Grand Rapids Agency to mask her mound site occupation.[^12]

Emma Big Bear Holt's site occupations achieved moderate success; where
she camped, amateur archaeologists did not excavate. Emma Big Bear Holt
was not the only Indigenous activist who lobbied for earthworks and
burial sites in the Midwest. Simultaneous to but independent from the
activism of Emma Big Bear Holt, Lyda Conly fought to protect a
nineteenth century burial site from corporate development from 1907 to
1910.

### Lyda Conley and Legal Challenges to Grave Robbing with a License, 1907--1910

Lyda Conley (1869--1946) was a member of a multi-ethnic Wyandot family
that experienced removals and attempted cultural erosion. The Wyandot
removal experience, where the federal government forcibly removed the
Wyandot from their ancestral homelands in Ohio to Kansas and Oklahoma,
profoundly impacted Lyda Conley's journey from Kansas to the Supreme
Court in Washington D.C. In 1842, the federal government forced the
Wyandot to cede all of their claims to lands in Ohio and Michigan in
exchange for lands in the Kansas territory; families and elders were
marched from northern Ohio, and the federal government forcibly
re-settled the Wyandot on the Missouri river in the Kansas
territory.[^13] On their forced march, a typhoid epidemic claimed the
lives of one hundred Wyandot people. On July 12, 1843, the Wyandot
established the Huron Place Cemetery and interred the remains of those
who had perished during their removal.[^14] From 1843 to 1907, families
buried nearly two hundred Wyandot citizens there. An 1844 treaty with
the Wyandot guaranteed that the Wyandot would always control the
cemetery.[^15]

In 1868, when Lyda Conley was born, the federal government allotted
Wyandot lands in Kansas and her family acquired a sixty-four-acre farm
in Wyandotte County, Kansas. With their proximity to Kansas City, the
Conley sisters had access to an emerging Midwestern cosmopolitan city;
three of the four daughters graduated from high school and Lyda and Ida
attended a women's college in Kansas City.[^16] Familiar with their
family's rich and multiethnic heritage, their cultural rites, and their
Wyandot national history, the Conley sisters were outraged to learn that
the Wyandotte Nation in Oklahoma had approved the sale of the Huron
Place Cemetery.

Colonial assimilationist policies physically and culturally divided the
Wyandot in Kansas beginning in 1855. Though the Huron Place cemetery had
been founded a dozen years earlier, in 1843, this burial ground became a
site of colonial contention. In 1855, the United States government
offered or forced U.S. citizenship upon select Wyandot; those who were
literate, owned property, or had a trade were invited or forced to give
up their Wyandot citizenship. For example, Elizabeth Zane Burton Conley
and her daughters were stripped of their Wyandot citizenship in 1855
when the federal Indian agent listed them on the Kansas Wyandot
rolls.[^17] Between 1855 and 1867, those Wyandot deemed unworthy of U.S.
citizenship relocated from Kansas to Oklahoma where they created the
Wyandotte Nation of Oklahoma; the United States government refused to
recognize the tribal sovereignty of the Wyandot who remained in Kansas
and the Wyandotte in Oklahoma retained legal authority over the Huron
Place Cemetery. In 1906, the Wyandotte Nation in Oklahoma approved the
sale of the cemetery for development and had Congress authorize the
United States Secretary of the Interior to convey it for sale.[^18] Lyda
Conley and her sisters strongly opposed the sale of the cemetery and
protested the federal government's continued efforts to terminate the
Kansas Wyandot's legal sovereignty. Because Lyda Conley was a prolific
public speaker, editorialist, and correspondent, her entire corpus can
be visualized.

Visualizing Lyda Conley's public speeches and her legal briefs reveals
the variety of rhetorical strategies that Conley used to advocate for
Huron Place Cemetery. For example, in public, she relied on Christian
metaphors. Lyda also perpetually linked Wyandot and Kansas to ensure the
legitimacy of the Kansas Wyandot land claims. In her legal briefs, Lyda
Conley consistently linked the Kansas Wyandot to treaties and
appropriated treaty language. 

{% figure caption: "Figure 3. A screenshot of a Voyant visualization created
using Lyda Conley's corpus. An [interactive version](https://voyant-tools.org/?corpus=61a9d41ae1f126c6a56c6d5290e60ea3) is also available." %}
![A Voyant visualization created using Lyda Conley's corpus.](/assets/img/v01/wise/figure3.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

In 1910, Lyda Conley traveled to Washington D.C. to argue her case
before the Supreme Court. Though she lost her case, she and her sister
continued to occupy the Huron Place Cemetery. In 1913, under pressure
from Kansas City Women's groups, Congress repealed the bill that
authorized the sale of the cemetery. In 1916, Senator Charles Curtis
introduced a bill in Congress that precluded the sale of the cemetery
and designated it a federal park.[^19]

### Implications

Indigenous activism that increases protections for earthworks and burial
sites in the Midwest is a narrative of continuous reform and activism.
This is not a story of a single legislative or litigative victory.
Recent Indigenous activism at Standing Rock represents not an aberration
from but rather the latest chapter in the long duree of Midwest
Indigenous activism. When Pan-Indian activists joined Standing Rock
water protectors to protest the construction of an oil pipeline near
their community, they cited concern over burial and sacred sites that a
pipeline leak would destroy. Twenty-first century water protectors used
familiar tactics to protest the destruction of Indigenous sovereignty
and burial sites: they challenged the legality of the construction of
the pipeline in court, they utilized relationship building and lobbying
to call attention to their plight, and they occupied sites to prevent
the physical destruction of burial sites. The Midwest will continue to
be a site of Indigenous activism especially when earthworks and burial
sites are threatened.

---

### Bibliography

Buss, James. *Winning the West with Words: Language and Conquest in the
Lower Great Lakes*. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2011.

Carman, Mary. "The Last Winnebago In Northeast Iowa" *Journal of the Iowa Archaeological Society* 35 (1988): 72--76.

Clark, Florence. "Economic Problems No Bother to Indian Family; Lives
Close to Nature." *Cedar Rapids Gazette and Republican*, July 18, 1931.

Clark, Florence. "Indian Quonset: Old Stuff to Emma Big Bear." *Dubuque Herald Telegraph*, November 2, 1946.

Cobb, Daniel M. and Loretta Fowler, eds. *Beyond red power: American Indian Politics and Activism Since 1900*. Santa Fe: School for Advanced Research, 2007.

Dayton, Kim. "Trespassers, Beware: Lyda Burton Conley and the Battle for Huron Place Cemetery." *Yale Journal of Law and Feminism* 8, no. 1 (1996): 1--30.

Dean, Samantha Rae. "'As Long As Grass Grows And Water Flows': Lyda Conley And The Huron Indian Cemetery." Master’s thesis, Fort Hays State University, 2016. <https://scholars.fhsu.edu/theses/31/>.

English, Jan. "A Chronological History of the Wyandot Nation of Kansas at 1902." Unpublished manuscript, on file with author. Wyandotte County Historical Society, 1994.

*Indian Census Rolls, 1885--1940*. National Archives Microfilm Publication M595, 692 rolls. Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Record Group 75. National Archives, Washington, D.C. Accessed at Ancestry.com. Provo, UT: Ancestry.com, 2007.

Kappler, Charles L., ed. *Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties 2*. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1904.

O'Brien, Jean. *Firsting and Lasting: Writing Indians out of Existence
in New England*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816665778.001.0001)

Oestreich, Nancy Lurie. *Wisconsin Indians*. Madison: Wisconsin
Historical Society, 2002.

Papers of Ellison Orr. "The Iowa (Oneota)" State Historical Society of Iowa, Iowa City.

Sleeper-Smith, Susan. *Indian Women and French Men: Rethinking Cultural
Encounter in the Western Great Lakes*. Boston: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001.

U.S. Census Bureau. *1930 Federal Census*. Enumerated by Bernadette Kensaw. April 8, 1930. 

---

### Notes

[^1]: The date is based on both Mary Carman's biography of Emma Big Bear
    Holt and Federal Indian Census Records that report Emma's change in
    address. See Carman, "The Last Winnebago In Northeast
    Iowa." On June 30, 1918, Emma Big Bear Holt reported at the
    Grand Rapids Agency in Wisconsin. See "1920 Indian Census," Grand Rapids Agency, Grand Rapids Wisconsin, Roll M595, Line 17, in *Indian Census Rolls, 1885--1940*.

[^2]: For a general history on the Ho-Chunk Removals, see Oestreich, *Wisconsin Indians*.

[^3]: There is only limited scholarship on Lyda Conley. See Dayton,
    "Trespassers, Beware," 1--31; Dean, "'As Long As Grass Grows And Water
    Flows'."

[^4]: In her newspaper editorials, Lyda Conley consistently emphasized
    the barbarity of disturbing the burials in the Huron Place Cemetery.
    The visualizations I created rely on her corpus of newspaper
    editorials and this claim is evidenced by the proximity and
    frequency of barbaric synonyms in her newspaper editorials.

[^5]: Buss, *Winning the West with Words*; O'Brien, *Firsting and Lasting*. These two texts explore how texts, memorials, and
    celebrations reinforced the progressive-traditional binary. This
    binary, a product of United States colonialism, declared that
    American Indian people who appeared assimilated were not truly
    Indigenous.

[^6]: For more on gender in Native North America in the Great Lakes
    region and Midwest, see Sleeper-Smith, *Indian Women and
    French Men*. The case studies in this article are of three women activists and this ties
    into other forms of activism in other contexts beyond removal. For
    more on American Indian politics at the turn of the twentieth
    century, see Cobb and Fowler, eds., *Beyond Red Power*.

[^7]: These visualizations are based on data gleaned from the Papers of
    Ellison Orr at the State Historical Society of Iowa. Amateur
    archaeologists like Orr were incredibly well organized and they
    corresponded frequently. Because Emma Big Bear was a minor celebrity
    in northeastern Iowa, it was possible to glean important biographic
    data from newspaper articles written about her.

[^8]: Papers of Ellison Orr, (MS 79) Box 6 Folder 3, "The Iowa (Oneota)"
    State Historical Society of Iowa, Iowa City.

[^9]: Clark, "Indian Quonset," 23; Clark, "Economic Problems No Bother to Indian Family," 7. Florence Clark, an amateur archaeologist and resident of McGregor,
    Iowa, wrote several times about Emma Big Bear Holt in Iowa
    newspapers. In her articles, Clark would quote Emma or her family
    speaking in pidgin English and her articles would inevitably
    speculate about how Emma and Henry made their living.
    
[^10]: Carman, "The Last Winnebago," 72--76. There is only one scholarly article on Emma Big Bear Holt and
    this article labels Emma Big Bear Holt "The Last Winnebago in
    Northeast Iowa". Mary Carman does not describe any of the other
    Indigenous families in northeastern Iowa in this article despite the
    fact that both state and federal census enumerators list these
    families in several censuses at the turn of the twentieth century.

[^11]: U.S. Census Bureau, *1930 Federal Census*, sheet no. 2B, pg. 940. In the 1930 Federal Census, Bernadette Kensaw listed Robert F. Holt as a nephew to William Henry Holt, a resident of Allamakee County, Iowa. 

[^12]: For general information on the Indian Census, see *Indian Census
    Rolls, 1885--1940*, National Archives. Emma Big Bear reported to the Grand Rapids Agency
    from 1919 to 1937.

[^13]: Dayton, "Trespassers, Beware," 4--10.

[^14]: Dayton, "Trespassers, Beware," 4--10.

[^15]: Dayton, "Trespassers, Beware," 4--10.

[^16]: English, "A Chronological History of the Wyandot Nation of Kansas at 1902." Jan English is Second Chief of the Wyandot Nation of Kansas.

[^17]: See Treaty with the Wyandot, Jan. 31, 1855, U.S.-Wyandot, 10 Stat 1159, reprinted in Charles L. Kappler, ed., *Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties 2* (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1904), 677.

[^18]: Dayton, "Trespassers, Beware," 13.

[^19]: Dayton, "Trespassers, Beware," 27.
