---
title: "Talk-Back Boards and Text Mining"
subtitle: "New Digital Approaches in Museum Visitor Studies"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.31835/crdh.2018.17"
category: "2018"
volume-number: 1
year: 2018
authors:
- last: Howard
  first: Josh
  email: josh@passelhc.com
  affiliation: "Passel Historical Consultants"
  orcid: 0000-0002-0303-093X
  url: "https://jhowardhistory.com"
abstract: |
  A simple analog tool–the post-it or sticky note–alongside text mining methodologies can open up new information about museum visitors. Since the late 1970s, museums have sought visitor engagement through talk-back boards, essentially a blank museum space with a printed question and a method of public response within reach. Visitors typically respond with short responses of less than ten words. Digitally exploring talk-back boards provides museums with a new visitor studies approach that provides increased simplicity in implementation, mass data creation, and low cost. The only significant shortcomings are the absence of demographic data collection and that talk-back boards remain an under-researched and method. Talk-back boards offer insight into visitor sensibilities that are often privately held and divorced from the museum setting itself, an insight that compliments the findings of the most common visitor studies methods. This study analyzes results from this approach gathered at two museums: Seminary Ridge Museum in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, and Women’s Rights National Historical Park in Seneca Falls, New York.
preview: "/assets/img/v01/howard/preview.png"
---

Museum visitor studies are in a bit of a rut. This is a statement that
should wrinkle foreheads and ruffle feathers, but the reality is
virtually all visitor studies projects gather data from visitors in one
of three ways: administering a survey scale, organizing focus groups, or
observing visitor behavior. Approaches vary and recent work in, for
example, *Visitor Studies* demonstrate a high degree of methodological
sophistication, but in reality most designs are hardly different than
some of the first visitor studies projects conducted in the 1920s and
1930s.[^1] However, a simple analog tool---the post-it or sticky note---alongside relatively new digital methods---various text mining
approaches---can open up new information about museum visitors. Since
the late 1970s, museums have deployed talk-back boards, an interactive
exhibit that encourages anonymous public responses to question prompts,
as a way to engage visitors.[^2] A talk-back board is essentially a
blank wall or freestanding board with a question printed above in large
text. Somewhere within reach, visitors are provided a stack of sticky
notes and a few writing utensils.[^3] Responses are short with an
average length of eight to twenty words depending on paper size. Museums
informally estimate between 10--25% of all visitors respond to talk-back
boards depending on location making the response rate relatively high
compared to other methods.[^4] Digitally exploring talk-back boards
provides museums with a new approach with advantages of simplicity, mass
data creation, and low cost; the only significant shortcomings are the
absence of demographic data collection and that talk-back boards remain
a significantly under-researched and under-utilized visitor studies
method.

Adding a few new digital tools to a preexisting visitor studies
framework provides insight into visitors that no other visitor studies
method can capture. Some text mining methods deployed in this analysis
include word frequency analysis, co-occurrence mapping, phrase
distribution, topic extraction, sentiment analysis, and Regressive
Imagery Dictionary (RID) categorization. As for data, the bulk was
gathered from Seminary Ridge Museum (SRM) in Gettysburg, PA and Women's
Rights National Historical Park (WORI) in Seneca Falls, NY. The data
included in the analysis includes all talk-back responses from SRM over
a sixteen-month period spanning 2013 and 2014 (n = 3227) and a random
sample of WORI responses created by visitors between 1993 and 2014 (n =
1257). A random sample approach was used for the WORI data because the
distribution of data was skewed toward the present as WORI employees did
not prioritize gathering talk-back board responses until roughly the
past decade.

{% figure caption: "Figure 1. SRM Talk-Back Board and part of the 'Remembrance, Reconciliation, Renewal' Exhibit (Photo by Author)" %}
![Photograph of a talk-back board at the Seminary Ridge Museum in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. The question reads: What do you thin is the unfinished work for freedom?](/assets/img/v01/howard/smr.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

The primary finding from this study is that talk-back boards offer
insight into visitor sensibilities that are often privately held and
divorced from the museum setting itself, an insight that compliments the
findings of the most common visitor studies methods (surveys, comment
books) and duplicates those from much more expensive approaches like
focus groups.[^5] For instance, visitors to SRM shared thoughts on
religion that were previously unknown despite the efforts of other
visitor studies approaches at the site. Other museums with a religious
history theme have reported challenges inferring visitors' private
religious or faith-based thoughts, suggesting talk-back board responses
provided information other methods cannot.[^6] As religious history
museums demonstrate, it is especially challenging to engage with the
public about religion and museums often have difficulty in understanding
what the public wants from their sites. From SRM for instance, a June
2012 survey of repeat Gettysburg visitors administered before the site
opened found extremely high interest (99%) in both the opening of a new
museum and in events from the first day of the Battle of Gettysburg, but
just under 50% of all respondents expressed interest in religion-related
topics, the lowest of all items. Some museum staff took this particular
survey result to mean that the museum should rethink their approach to
incorporate even more Battle of Gettysburg interpretation. However,
since SRM's opening in June 2013, visitation to the site has been
healthy and visitors express interest in the religious history
presented. Given such a disconnect between survey results and outcomes,
the question of how to measure visitor engagement of religious themes at
this historic site pestered museum staff.

To address this question, SRM staff installed a talk-back board at the
end of the exhibit hall that posed the question "What do you think is
the unfinished work for freedom?" Staff noticed immediately that
visitors used the talk-back board to reflect upon a range of topics
beyond the question\'s intent though most focused upon politics or
religion without any explicit prompting. About 10.7 percent of all
respondents directly referenced religion, making "religion" the second
most common theme (less than 1 percent behind the most common theme
"equality").[^7] Difficult topics and complex sensibilities, such as
religious belief, consistently emerged from the talk-back board as
virtually all respondents couched their responses in such terms. An
unexpected result was that very few, less than one percent, referenced
the physical museum space itself. This result is in stark contrast to
other visitor studies methods, such as museum comment books or surveys,
where the inverse ratio is true.[^8] Further, interactive exhibits
research suggested talk-back respondents would directly interact with
one another, but just 5.4 percent of all responses clearly interacted
via a drawn arrow or reference to a nearby post-it note. Most chose to
speak out independently with their own response rather than respond
directly to others, which may explain why 10 percent of all respondents
provided a signature to publicly claim their talk-back board response.

The critical outcomes of this study at CRM centered on the large
quantity of religion-themed responses that did not engage the talk-back
question alongside a relatively high proportion of emotion-laden
responses. Religiously-minded tourists are a highly diverse group of
visitors, so more studies using talk-back boards could discover why so
many religious respondents chose not to engage the question and
what specific faith-based interests drive tourism to SRM and sites like
it. As tourism scholar Amos Ron argued, visitors to religious sites
like cathedrals and shrines usually pursue faith-based objectives, but
also are in search of culture, cognitive engagement, and/or historical
meaning.[^9] This mixture of spiritual and secular cultural values is
apparent in the talk-back board responses, but merit further exploration
through the deployment of more talk-back boards. Similarly, the critical
role of emotion and restoration at religious sites, SRM included,
supports the further use of talk-back boards. Visitors to religious
sites generally report stronger emotional connections partially because
of faith, but also because of the perceived authenticity of cathedrals,
mosques, and other religious sites.[^10] SRM, the seminary itself, and
the surrounding battlefield each possess a special authenticity and thus
potential for emotive engagement which can be detected in talk-back
board analysis. In comparing SRM with WORI via RID Categorization tests,
SRM visitors expressed affection significantly more often in their
responses (10.7% v. 5.2%, p < 0.01), WORI visitors more often couched
their responses in sensory language, (13.5% v. 6.5%, p < 0.01) and both
groups of visitors used a high degree of abstract language (such as
"know", "may", "thought", or "understand"). This result suggests
that questionnaire-based research is not accurate in some museums as
many visitors could view such questioning as intrusive in a religious
setting. Rather than interrupting the ambiance of a site many consider
sacred, new talk-back questions could tap into such complex questions
one piece at a time.

{% figure caption: "Figure 2. WORI Talk-Back Board, July 2014 (Photo by Author)" %}
![Photograph of a talk-back board at the Women's Rights National Historical Park in Seneca Falls, New York. The question reads: What will it be like when men and women are truly equal?](/assets/img/v01/howard/wori.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

Talk-back boards also generate surprising revelations about museum
visitors. Both SRM and WORI talk-back boards independently generated a
significant number of responses about LGBTQ+ Rights. The WORI talk-back
board posed the question "What will it be like when men and women are
truly equal?" WORI Talk-back respondent language regarding LGBTQ+
themes changed significantly over time suggesting both a greater
interest in such themes and broader social change. In the 1990s, the
more common phrases used by visitors included the words "women" and
"gay." By the late 2000s, respondents spoke of "LGBT Rights", "gay
marriage", and "gender" as opposed to "women's rights" or "gay
rights" and a few respondents specifically referenced transgender
rights for the first time. These shifts in language resulted in curators
recognizing the need to update certain aspects of their interpretation
to better speak to visitors. Since this analysis, WORI organized
multiple public events and initiated research into curating a new
exhibit on transgender rights.[^11]

At SRM, the presence of any LGBTQ+ themes was a surprise. "Gay
Marriage" and "Gay Rights" were the seventh and twelfth most common
word phrases respectively alongside other expected phrases involving
religion, equality, and politics. Of the 95 LGBTQ+ themed responses, 82
expressed support, a ratio that is significantly more socially
progressive than national averages.[^12] This is even more surprising
given the sheer quantity of socially and politically conservative
responses seen across the SRM responses, such as the eleventh most
common phrase of "impeach Obama." These results, once digested by
museum staff, encouraged the creation of new exhibits or interpretation
engaging LGBTQ+ Rights. As of this writing, SRM is highly open to such
exhibits in the near future and is engaged in active research.[^13]

Slavery was also an important topic of interest for staff at both sites.
Slavery is readily apparent in SRM interpretation as exhibits engage
questions of slavery, freedom, and equality with the hope that visitors
would connect each theme to larger, more philosophical questions. From
initial surveys, it was unclear as to whether or not these pedagogical
goals were being met. Visitors simply did not---or would not---discuss
difficult topics like race and freedom with museum staff face-to-face.
From the talk-back board however, it was clear that many visitors made
the desired connections (even though a handful of respondents rejected
slavery as the primary cause of the Civil War). In contrast, WORI
exhibits hardly discuss slavery at all, yet many visitors made
connections between gender equality and race-based chattel slavery using
abstract, emotion-driven language. A topic extraction analysis, where
each response is broken down into stem words to discover common words
that account for model variance, found a statistically significant
percentage of respondents referenced sex equality (39.3%), social
equality (9.2%), and economic equality (11.6%). Most respondents in the
social equality category discussed racial equality, most poignantly
expressed by the following respondent:

> I think a lot of 'being equal' has to do with the defining of
> 'power.' Our society today is so power conscious that true equality
> between men and women must be something considered at the same time as
> 'class power of the rich.' just as slavery spurred an inspiration of
> gender equality, so should the political imbalance. (Response
> 2296.2010.10.9)[^14]

Topic extraction results further suggested each talk-back question
effectively engaged visitors on an abstract level as visitors commonly
responded with sense-driven, emotive language regardless of topic.[^15]

Altogether, these results demonstrate how talk-back boards can help
amplify visitor voices that typically go unheard in museum spaces and,
in making these voices heard, can help create a more meaningful
experience, better exhibits and programming, and a more successful
museum overall. This essay gives but a brief overview of results from a
study with its broadest conclusion being that talk-back boards are best
used to ascertain visitors' sensibilities that are generally
inaccessible via most other visitor studies methods. Additionally,
talk-back boards should be designed to encourage visitor expressions of
these sensibilities facilitated by thoughtful placement, a measure of
solitude, and constant paper size. Finally, for anyone wishing to
install their own talk-back board, each response must be given equal
weight in final assessments. An anecdotal analysis tends to favor more
thoughtful responses, such as Response 2296.2010.10.9 shared above,
while a digital approach removes this particular element of bias. These
results mean that this approach provides a relatively affordable and
universally applicable visitor studies method unlike any other. Museums
of all types could and should deploy such informal visitor studies
methods to better understand and incorporate their stakeholders, deliver
a better museum experience, and ultimately be better stewards of public
history.

---

### Bibliography

Binks, G., and D. Uzzel. "Monitoring and Evaluation: The Techniques." In
*The Educational Role of the Museum*, edited by E. Hooper-Greenhill, 298--301. New York:
Routledge, 1994.

Bond, Nigel, Jan Packer, and Roy Ballantyne. "Exploring Visitor
Experiences, Activities and Benefits at Three Religious Tourism Sites."
*International Journal of Tourism Research* 17, no. 5 (2014): 471--481. <https://doi.org/10.1002/jtr.2014>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jtr.2014)

Chen, Chia-Li. "Representing and Interpreting Traumatic History: A Study
of Visitor Comment Books at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum."
*Museum Management and Curatorship* 27 (2012): 379. <https://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2012.720186>. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2012.720186)

Falk, J. H., J.J. Koran, L.D. Dierking, and L. Dreblow. "Predicting
Visitor Behavior." *Curator* 28 (1985): 249--257. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2151-6952.1985.tb01753.x> [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2151-6952.1985.tb01753.x)

Franco, Barbara (SRM Director). Interview by Josh Howard. March 14, 2015.

Franco, Barbara (SRM Director) and Pete Miele (SRM Director of Education
and Museum Operations). Interview by Josh Howard. March 14, 2015.

Frank, Nathaniel. *Awakening: How Gays and Lesbians Brought Marriage
Equality to America*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017.

Howard, Josh. "Talking Back with Post-It Notes: Informal Data
Collection and Museum Visitors." PhD diss., Middle Tennessee State
University, 2016.

Macdonald, Sharon. "Accessing Audiences: Visiting Visitor Books."
*Museum and Society* 3 (2005): 119--136.

Miglietta, Anna, Ferdinando Boero, and Genuario Belmonte. "Museum
Management and Visitor Books: There Might Be A Link?." *Museologia
Scientifica* 6 (2012): 94--95.

National Museum of American History. "Talking Back to the Museum."
*Smithsonian.com*, April 10, 2013.
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/blog/2013/04/talking-back-to-the-museum.html>.

National Museum of American History. "Calendar of Exhibition and Events
National Museum of American History December 2015." *Smithsonian.com*,
April 10, 2013.
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/press/releases/calendar-exhibition-and-events-national-museumamerican-history-december-2015>.

National Museum of American History. "Introducing TalkBack Tuesdays."
*Smithsonian.com*, June 21, 2011.
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/blog/2011/06/introducing-talkback-tuesdays.html>.

Noy, Chaim. "Pages as Stages: A Performance Approach to Visitor Books."
*Annals of Tourism Research* 35 (2008): 509--528.

Robinson, E.S. *The Behavior of the Museum Visitor*. Washington, DC:
American Association of Museums, 1928.

Ron, Amos S. "Towards a Typological Model of Contemporary Christian
Travel." *Journal of Heritage Tourism* 4, no. 4 (2009): 287--297.

Ron, Amos S., and Jackie Feldman. "From Spots to Themed Sites---The
Evolution of the Protestant Holy Land." *Journal of Heritage Tourism*
4, no. 3 (2009): 201--216.

Rose, Vivien (WORI Chief of Cultural Resources). Interview by Josh
Howard. July 18, 2014.

Sieburth, J.F., and D.S. Gleisner. "Talk Back---A Tool for Public
Relations." *RQ* 17 (1977): 17--18.

Simon, Nina. *The Participatory Museum*. Santa Cruz, CA: Museum 2.0,
2010.

Wallace, Margot A. *Consumer Research for Museum Marketers: Audience
Insights Money Can't Buy*. New York: AltaMira Press, 2010.

Women's Rights National Historical Park. "The Good, the Bad, and the Funny." 
<https://www.nps.gov/wori/planyourvisit/event-details.htm?event=7951D8D3-1DD8-B71B-0B22220F208C916A>.

Women's Rights National Historical Park. "Melissa Grace Park----Music Event."
<https://www.nps.gov/wori/planyourvisit/event-details.htm?event=E534C75F-1DD8-B71B-0B91F562A28E9CAB>.

Women's Rights National Historical Park. "WORI to Hold Discussion in Commemoration of LGBT Month." June 18, 2016. <https://www.nps.gov/wori/learn/news/wori-to-hold-discussion-in-commemoration-of-lgbt-month.htm>.

Women's Rights National Historical Park Library. Talk-Back Board Collection. Seneca Falls, NY.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For example, see studies of museum fatigue. Robinson, *The
    Behavior of the Museum Visitor*, 7--42; Falk, Koran, Dierking, and
    Dreblow, "Predicting Visitor Behavior," 249--257.

[^2]: Sieburth and Gleisner, "Talk Back," 17--18; Simon, *The
    Participatory Museum*, ii.

[^3]: Museums occasionally deploy slightly different talk-back boards
    using dry-erase markers and whiteboards or online message board,
    chat room, or forum systems. These are comparatively uncommon and
    those of this type surveyed for this research were all intended to
    be temporary compared to the permanence of a "post-it note"
    talk-back board. For example, see the programs created from 2011 to
    2013 by the Smithsonian National Museum of American History.
    National Museum of American History, "Introducing TalkBack
    Tuesdays"; National Museum of American History, "Talking Back to the
    Museum"; National Museum of American History, "Calendar of
    Exhibition and Events National Museum of American History December
    2015."

[^4]: Franco, interview; Rose, interview.

[^5]: Binks and Uzzel, "Monitoring and Evaluation," 298--301; Macdonald,
    "Accessing Audiences," 119--136; Wallace, *Consumer Research for
    Museum Marketers*, 32--33.

[^6]: Chen, "Representing and Interpreting Traumatic History," 379; Noy,
    "Pages as Stages," 509--528.

[^7]: All results and data are summarized in more depth in Howard,
    "Talking Back with Post-It Notes."

[^8]: Miglietta, Boero, and Belmonte, "Museum Management and Visitor
    Books," 94--95.

[^9]: Ron and Feldman, "From Spots to Themed Sites," 201--216; Ron,
    "Towards a Typological Model," 287--297.

[^10]: Bond, Packer, and Ballantyne, "Exploring Visitor Experiences," 471--481.

[^11]: Women's Rights National Historical Park (WORI), "The Good, the Bad, and the Funny"; WORI, "Melissa Grace Park---Music Event"; WORI, "WORI to Hold Discussion in Commemoration of LGBT Month."

[^12]: Frank, *Awakening*, 272--276.

[^13]: Franco and Miele, interview.

[^14]: Women's Rights National Historical Park Library, Talk-Back Board Collection, Seneca Falls, NY.

[^15]: Howard, 162--169.
