---
title: "Glitching History"
subtitle: "Using Image Deformance to Rethink Agency and Authenticity in the 1960s American Folk Music Revival"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.31835/crdh.2018.08"
category: "2018"
volume-number: 1
year: 2018
authors:
- last: Kramer
  first: Michael J.
  email: michaelk@middlebury.edu
  affiliation: "Digital Liberal Arts Initiative, Middlebury College"
  orcid: 0000-0002-4522-0547
  url: "http://www.michaeljkramer.net"
abstract: |
  Tactics of glitching and deformance, which alter existing digital data into new outputs through the manipulation of underlying code, offer untapped possibilities for historical inquiry. A photograph of musicians Mississippi John Hurt, Doc Watson, and Sam Hinton at the 1964 Berkeley Folk Music Festival serves as a case study for discovering how glitching and deformance reveal previously undetected aspects of the historical record: when glitched, the photograph sparks a heightened awareness of how Hurt and Watson, forced to be carriers of a limiting racial and regional authenticity, also found ways to expand their freedom and agency within the constraints of early 1960s consensus liberalism in the United States. While most histories of the folk revival focus on its primarily white, middle-class audiences, if even to critique their actions, the glitched image aids us in accessing the experiences of Hurt and Watson more robustly. In this way, a digital distortion of a photograph paradoxically produces a more accurate interpretation of the history it captures, enabling a compelling intervention in historiographic debates about the folk revival and its post-World War II American context.
preview: "/assets/img/v01/kramer/preview.png"
---

The photograph from the Berkeley Folk Music Revival presents a Mount
Rushmore of the 1960s folk revival: Delta songster "Mississippi" John
Hurt and Appalachian mountain music virtuoso Arthel "Doc" Watson stand
on each side of the professorial folk interpreter Sam Hinton, who served
as master of ceremonies for the annual festival that took place on the
University of California's flagship campus from 1958 to 1970 (figure
1).[^1] The image, a seemingly candid portrait taken by Festival staff
photographer Kelly Hart on a sunny summer afternoon in 1964, possesses
an iconic quality. It proposes that these three men form some kind of
symbolic American string band trio, one that has reordered race and
region in the United States into a harmonious ensemble: the long-running
antagonisms between black and white in the South, as represented by Hurt
and Watson, have been allayed as they assemble way out West around the
middle-class, cosmopolitan core of the folk revival audience, as
represented by the figure of Hinton. It is an image of the radical hopes
for transformation found within the problematic limitations of the
postwar liberal consensus:[^2] Delta black folk hero and Appalachian
white one come together around their interlocutor, as if to claim that
roots music might help root out the legacies of Jim Crow segregation,
slavery, and other social ills in America; yet here, even in this
reformist milieu, everything still revolves around the white elites, who
remain at the center.

{% figure caption: "Figure 1. 'Mississippi' John Hurt, Sam Hinton, and Arthel 'Doc' Watson at the Berkeley Folk Music Festival, 1964. Photograph: Kelly Hart." %}
![A photograph showing "Mississippi" John Hurt holding a guitar, Sam Hinton, and Arthel "Doc" Watson holding a banjo at the Berkeley Folk Music Festival, 1964](/assets/img/v01/kramer/original-image.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

Might digital techniques help us not merely reproduce this underlying,
structuring logic of postwar American culture, but instead enhance our
capacity to "brush history against the grain," as Walter Benjamin
famously put it, when we develop historical narratives?[^3] Can the
qualities of the digital medium help us to perceive the full range of
meanings and implications in our source materials, and do so more
critically, dynamically, and compellingly? How do we not only see what
is on the surface of our sources, but also grasp the less obvious
dimensions of the past that they capture but do not present explicitly?
What, in other words, are the new pathways for cultural history when
wrought in binary code?

Much of the hype about digital history pertains to a renewed interest in
cliometrics, since unprecedented computational power makes it possible
to analyze large amounts of data statistically in search of the
overarching structures of the *longue dur√©e*; however, an underdeveloped
dimension of digital analysis for historical inquiry can also be found
in tactics of glitching and deformance.[^4] More popular in the art
world, New Media Studies, and more adventurous corners of digital
literary studies, glitching and deformance have something to offer
digital history as well: if used strategically and creatively, they
foster new insights into the agency of individuals navigating the larger
structural forces that techniques such as cliometrics have the potential
to bring to light.

What are glitching and deformance, exactly? Glitching is a digital
tactic that produces new iterations of a digital file by introducing or
removing strands of code, either at random or through some kind of
logical "chance operation."[^5] It causes a digital file not to render
as originally intended, and privileges mistakes as, ironically,
revealing deeper accuracies about a digital file's form and
content.[^6] The related concept of deformance involves similar acts of
alteration in service of interpretive revelation. Mark Sample defines
the term as "a *portmanteau* that combines the words performance and
deform into an interpretative concept premised upon deliberately
misreading a text, for example, reading a poem backwards
line-by-line."[^7] Originally developed as a concept by literary
scholars Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels, deformance intensifies
distortions of source materials; changes are made in service of
discovering buried meanings within the seemingly self-evident---but in
fact highly structured---mediations of an artifact.[^8]

Glitching and deformance are, admittedly, unlikely candidates for
historical inquiry. Usually historians emphasize the stability of their
sources and privilege the proximity of an artifact or document to its
moment in time. In a seminar I teach, however, we deploy glitching and
deformance to think more carefully and precisely about the past.
Misrepresenting our artifacts allows us to consider the full range of
their representations. This is revisionist history in the best sense, in
that we are revising the original look of sources to access their deeper
levels. We begin with an exercise adapted from the librarian and digital
theorist Trevor Owens.[^9] Owens suggests that to combat what he calls 
"screen essentialism"---the idea that a Graphical User Interface (a
GUI) is transparently presenting text, images, or anything else when we
use a computer---we might dig into the code below and mess with it.
Manipulating the code, even at random, and then re-rendering the file as
an image makes it possible to glimpse, through glitching, the difference
between what appears on screen to human eyes and what a computer
processes at the level of machine-readable code. So too, it helps us
become more cognizant not only of screen essentialism, but also of
historical essentialism. By making us more aware of the details and
meanings---the component parts---within artifactual sources, glitching
and deformance prevent the assumption that sources provide transparent
windows on the past. Rather than merely reproducing what artifacts
contain, glitching and deformance help us see through their mediations
more vividly. Altering the source through strategic acts of
randomization opens up all that the source compresses. It unveils the
roiling "deep contingency," as Ed Ayers calls it, below the
overdetermined surface of historical artifacts.[^10] Messing things up
helps us see them more accurately.

Take the case of the photograph with which I began this essay. Once the
print photograph was digitized, one of my seminar students, Nathan
Anderson, drew upon Owens's "screen essentialism" assignment to open
the JPEG file as a text file, pull out some code at random, and
reproduce the file as a new JPEG image. When he did so, suddenly
Mississippi John Hurt's head had moved from margin to center (figure
2). Nathan, to be clear, was not Stalin airbrushing purged Soviet
officials out of official photographs; rather, he (Nathan not Stalin)
created a remix that raises new questions about the meanings lurking in
the artifact. Moving the artifact away from its original form brings us
closer to the stakes up for grabs in its originating historical moment:
revising the "text" helped us better access the context.

{% figure caption: "Figure 2. Student Nathan Anderson's 2013 glitch experiment with Kelly Hart's photograph of Hurt, Hinton, and Watson." %}
![A glitched photograph showing from left to right, Arthel "Doc" Watson, "Mississippi" John Hurt and Sam Hinton.](/assets/img/v01/kramer/glitched-image.jpg)
{% endfigure %}

With Nathan's particular glitch, we can ask what happens if we place
John Hurt at the heart of the 1960s folk music revival narrative rather
than the middle-class, white, urban audience that typically dominates
historical recountings.[^11] Even in historical studies that are
critical of that audience, its members remain the protagonists of the
story.[^12] To make Hurt the central subject and a historical agent is
to explore more probingly what the folk revival might have meant to a
man born in 1892 in the Jim Crow South to parents who were emancipated
slaves, and, more crucially, how Hurt actively navigated the 1960s folk
revival for his own purposes. Nathan's glitch, an accident, alerts us
to how Hurt pursued his own agency within the 1960s folk revival milieu.

Recording a series of obscure tracks for the OKeh label in the late
1920s, Hurt disappeared into obscurity during the 1930s until a few of
his original recordings resurfaced on the influential *Folkways
Anthology of American Folk Music*, curated by avant-garde artist,
bohemian, and collector Harry Smith and released in 1952. Most listeners
figured Hurt was long dead by the 1960s, but he had, in fact, been
working as a farmhand near his hometown of Avalon, Mississippi. In 1963,
a young white blues fan from Washington, DC, Tom Hoskins, found him and
invited Hurt to perform and record again.[^13] Typically put in the role
of avuncular inspirer of the revival, supposedly trapped into having
to play the authentic folk musician, Hurt also, as Nathan's glitch
suggests, made the most of being thrust to stage center of the folk
revival.[^14] Hoskins and other revivalists forced Hurt into performing
the role of authentic folk hero from days gone by; Hurt, in turn, used
the revival to transcend the limitations of Jim Crow, to travel, make a
living, meet new people, and garner new experiences.

By shifting Hurt to the center of the story in the glitched photo, we
see more clearly how he negotiated the folk revival on his terms,
drawing upon deep continuities and powerful resources in his own
life---his love of music, his deep religiosity that did not preclude an
earthy embrace of the profane---to transcode himself into the shifting
contours of region, race, and cultural context during the 1960s.
Watching Hurt glitch himself and his music into the opportunities
presented by the 1960s folk revival, one is struck at how adept he was
at capitalizing on what must, at times, have sometimes felt like random,
chance encounters such as Hoskins's arrival at his door in 1963.
Glitching takes us more clearly toward how Hurt explored the radical
potential for self and collective freedom coiled up within the
constraints of the liberal consensus context. The revival seemed to pin
Hurt in place as a bearer of the authentic Southern African-American
past, but he turned around the beat and instead used the intense
interest in his music and persona to roar into the future.

Glitching artifacts such as this photograph helps us better see the
agency of participants such as Hurt, caught up in the revival's
representations and their underlying ideological motivations. We can
shift out of the obsessive focus on how white, middle-class audiences
imposed authenticity on figures such as Hurt and catch how seemingly
marginalized actors and participants such as the guitarist exerted
agency too.[^15] To examine Nathan's glitch illuminates other things as
well: we notice how Hurt's face now sits above Watson's banjo, a
reminder of the surprising travels of this instrument, originally from
West Africa, into white Appalachian life. Watson's head, meanwhile, now
sits above Hinton's thin "mod" striped tie, as if to point out how
Watson's own story had its glitchy surprises when it comes to the
traditional and the modern: Watson in fact began his career as an
electric rockabilly guitarist in North Carolina before folklorist Ralph
Rinzler "discovered" him and urged him to return to his family and
region's musical roots.[^16] Watson, like Hurt, made the most of the
opportunities that the folk revival as part of consensus liberalism
afforded him. He too glitched tradition. By moving Hurt closer to
Watson, the glitch also reminds us how much the African American
Mississippi delta blues songster loved white country music made by
figures such as Jimmie Rodgers.[^17] Rewriting songs such as "Waiting
for a Train" into his own compositions, he enacted his own subversive
deformances, complicating racialized sonic boundaries through the folk
process.[^18] Indeed, manager Dick Waterman notes that Hurt¬†spent the
summer just before his death in 1966 avidly listening to recordings by
none other than...Doc Watson.[^19]

These two Southern musicians were far less apart in their tastes than
the positioning of them on either side of Hinton might at first suggest.
Glitching warns us, nonetheless, to pay attention to the persistence of
racialized difference in the liberal folk revival. While Hurt has moved
to the center in Nathan's glitched photograph, the deformation of the
image has also caused Hinton and Watson's blazers to merge: as much as
we might see into the potential in the folk revival for radical
reconfigurations of culture, we cannot fully ignore or forget the
persistence of race in shaping even sincere and heartfelt postwar
liberal efforts to undo white supremacy. The boundaries between who was
white and who was black did not ever come close to disappearing.

Overall, in heightening our awareness of details and what they suggest
about interpretations of the past, glitching and deformance make it
possible for us to brush history against the grain by, in a certain
sense, changing the patterns of the grain itself. Digitally remediated,
the source's representational layers become more alive. Distortions to
artifacts caused by these tactics ironically generate more accurate
considerations of the traces of the past embedded in them. And because
they tweak---even destabilize---sources, glitching and deformance do not
merely reproduce the dominant ideologies that get lodged in supposedly
objective data such as photographs.[^20] Instead, glitching and
deformance syncopate our source materials. They allow us to hear the
fretwork of history's complex chordal arrangements with more acumen.
And they help us see more clearly how people in the past such as Hurt
and Watson creatively navigated the pulsing rhythm of history's
alternating bass lines---between continuity and change, structure and
agency, tradition and revision, authenticity and innovation---with
pluck, dexterity, and virtuosity.

---

### Bibliography

Armitage, David and Jo Guldi. *The History Manifesto*. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2014. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139923880 )

Ayers, Edward L. "Turning toward Place, Space, and Time." In *Deep
Maps and Spatial Narratives*, edited by David J. Bodenhamer, John Corrigan,
and Trevor M. Harris, 1--13. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2015. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1zxxzr2 )

Benjamin, Walter. "Theses on the Philosophy of History." In
*Illuminations*, edited by Hannah Arendt, translated by Harry Zohn, 253--264. New York:
Harcourt Brace Javonovich, 1968.

Berkeley Folk Music Festival Project. <http://www.bfmf.net>.

Betancourt, Michael. *Glitch Art in Theory and Practice: Critical
Failures and Post-Digital Aesthetics*. New York: Focal Press, 2016. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315414812 )

Cage, John. *Silence: Lectures and Writings*. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press, 1961.

Cantwell, Robert. *When We Were Good: The Folk Revival*. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1996.

Cohen, Ronald D. *Rainbow Quest: The Folk Music Revival and American
Society, 1940--1970*. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2002.

Filene, Benjamin. *Romancing the Folk: Public Memory and American Roots
Music*. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2000.

Grundell, Vendela. *Flow And Friction: On The Tactical Potential Of
Interfacing With Glitch Art*. Stockholm: Art And Theory Publishing,
2016. 

Gustavson, Kent. *Blind But Now I See: The Biography of Music Legend Doc
Watson*. New York: Blooming Twig Books, 2012.

Hagstrom Miller, Karl. *Segregating Sound: Inventing Folk and Pop Music
in the Age of Jim Crow*. Durham: Duke University Press, 2010.

Hale, Grace Elizabeth. *A Nation of Outsiders: How the White Middle
Class Fell in Love with Rebellion in Postwar America*. Oxford University
Press, 2011.

Hartz, Louis. *The Liberal Tradition in America: An Interpretation of
American Political Thought Since the Revolution*. New York: Harcourt
Brace & Company, 1955.

Higham, John. "The Cult of the 'American Consensus': Homogenizing Our
History." *Commentary* 27 (January 1959): 93--100.

Hodgson, Godfrey. *America in Our Time: From World War II to
Nixon---What Happened and Why*. 1976. Reprint, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2005.

Hurt, Mississippi John. *The Complete 1928 OKeh Recordings*. Columbia
Legacy 64986, released 1996.

Hurt, Mississippi John. "Let the Mermaids Flirt With Me," *Last
Sessions*. Vanguard VSD-79327, recorded 1966, released 1972.

Gerstle, Gary. "Race and the Myth of the Liberal Consensus." *Journal
of American History* 82, 2 (1995): 579--86. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2307/2082187 )

Kramer, Michael J. "Distorting History (To Make It More Accurate)."
*Issues in Digital History* 3 (April 2016).
<http://www.michaeljkramer.net/distorting-history-to-make-it-more-accurate/>.

Kramer, Michael J. "'A Foreign Sound to Your Ear': Digital Image
Sonification For Historical Interpretation." In *Provoke! Digital Sound
Studies*, edited by Mary Caton Lingold, Darren Mueller, and Whitney Anne
Trettien, 178--214. Durham: Duke University Press, 2018.

McGann, Jerome and Lisa Samuels. "Deformance and Interpretation."¬†*New
Literary History*¬†30, 1 (1999): 25--56. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1353/nlh.1999.0010 )

Menkman, Rosa. "Glitch Studies Manifesto (2011)." In *Video Vortex
Reader II: Moving Images Beyond YouTube*, edited by Geert Lovink and Rachel
Somers-Miles, 336--347. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2011. 

Owens, Trevor. "Glitching Files for Understanding: Avoiding¬†Screen
Essentialism¬†in Three Easy Steps." *The Signal: Library of Congress
Blog*, November 5, 2012.

Payne, Charles M. *I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing
Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom Struggle*. University of
California Press, 1995.

Ratcliffe, Philip R. *Mississippi John Hurt: His Life, His Times, His
Blues*. Oxford: University Press of Mississippi, 2011. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.14325/mississippi/9781617030086.001.0001 )

Rodgers, Jimmie. *Blue Yodel No. 4 (California Blues) / Waiting For A
Train*. Victor V-40014, 1929.

Sample, Mark. "Notes towards a Deformed Humanities." *Sample Reality*.
May 2, 2012. <https://www.samplereality.com/2012/05/02/notes-towards-a-deformed-humanities>.

Schlesinger, Jr., Arthur M. *The Vital Center: The Politics of Freedom*. 1949. Reprint, New York: Da Capo, 1988. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351301800 )

Seeger, Pete. *The Incompleat Folksinger*. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1972.

Smith, Harry, ed. *Folkways Anthology of American Folk Music*.
Originally released 1952; first released on CD by Smithsonian Folkways,
SFW 40090, 1997.

Waterman, Dick. "John Hurt; Patriarch Hippie." *Sing Out!*.
(February/March 1967): 7.

---

### Notes

[^1]: For more on the festival, see [*Berkeley Folk Music Festival Project*](http://www.bfmf.net "Berkeley Folk Music Festival Project") website.

[^2]: The formative studies of the liberal consensus---as much shaping
    it as historicizing it---remain Schlesinger, Jr., *The Vital Center*
    and Hartz, *The Liberal Tradition in America.* See, also, John
    Higham, "The Cult of the 'American Consensus'"; Hodgson,
    *America in Our Time*, 67--98; and Gerstle, "Race and the Myth of
    the Liberal Consensus."

[^3]: Benjamin, "Theses on the Philosophy of History," 257.

[^4]: On the call for a digital turn back to cliometrics, see Armitage
    and Guldi, *History Manifesto*.

[^5]: On "chance operations," see Cage, *Silence.*

[^6]: Glitching has a long-running history in the visual arts in the
    work of Naim Juk Paik, among others, but it came of age in the 1990s
    and 2000s; see Grundell, *Flow And Friction*; Betancourt, *Glitch
    Art in Theory and Practice*; and Menkman, "Glitch Studies Manifesto
    (2011)."

[^7]: Sample, "Notes towards a Deformed Humanities."

[^8]: McGann and Samuels, "Deformance and Interpretation."

[^9]: Owens offers this exercise to challenge what he calls "screen
    essentialism"; see Owens, "Glitching Files for Understanding."
    The glitching experiments by my students can be viewed at Kramer,
    "[Distorting History (To Make It More Accurate)](http://www.michaeljkramer.net/distorting-history-to-make-it-more-accurate)."

[^10]: Ayers, "Turning toward Place, Space, and Time."

[^11]: Cantwell, *When We Were Good*; Cohen, *Rainbow Quest*.

[^12]: Hale, *A Nation of Outsiders*.

[^13]: Hurt, *The Complete 1928 OKeh Recordings*; *Folkways Anthology of
    American Folk Music*.

[^14]: There is not space here to provide the important details of
    Hurt's biography, but for more on his life, see Ratcliffe,
    *Mississippi John Hurt*. For the Mississippi context in which Hurt
    came of age, see Payne, *I've Got the Light of Freedom*.

[^15]: For more on authenticity in the folk revival builds, see Filene,
    *Romancing the Folk*.

[^16]: Gustavson, *Blind But Now I See*.

[^17]: For background on how racial binaries shaped---we might even say
    distorted---genre categories in American music, see Hagstrom Miller,
    *Segregating Sound*.

[^18]: Rodgers, *Blue Yodel No. 4 (California Blues) / Waiting For A
    Train*; Mississippi John Hurt, "Let the Mermaids Flirt With Me."
    For more on understanding folk music as "a process, not a static
    existence," see Seeger, *The Incompleat Folksinger*.

[^19]: Waterman, "John Hurt; Patriarch Hippie."

[^20]: For more on this approach, see Kramer, "'A Foreign Sound to
    Your Ear.'"
